Title: Learning Causal Structure of Time Series using Best Order Score Search

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.05370v1

Published Time: Fri, 06 Mar 2026 02:30:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
> Preprint 1–19

# Learning Causal Structure of Time Series using Best Order Score Search 

Irene Gema Castillo Mansilla IRENE .CASTILLO @UNI -POTSDAM .DE 

University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany 

Urmi Ninad URMI .NINAD @UNI -POTSDAM .DE 

Department of Computer Science, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany 

Abstract 

Causal structure learning from observational data is central to many scientific and policy domains, but the time series setting common to many disciplines poses several challenges due to temporal dependence. In this paper we focus on score-based causal discovery for multivariate time series and introduce TS-BOSS, a time series extension of the recently proposed Best Order Score Search (BOSS) (Andrews et al., 2023). TS-BOSS performs a permutation-based search over dynamic Bayesian network structures while leveraging grow–shrink trees to cache intermediate score compu-tations, preserving the scalability and strong empirical performance of BOSS in the static setting. We provide theoretical guarantees establishing the soundness of TS-BOSS under suitable assump-tions, and we present an intermediate result that extends classical subgraph minimality results for permutation-based methods to the dynamic (time series) setting. Our experiments on synthetic data show that TS-BOSS is especially effective in high auto-correlation regimes, where it consistently achieves higher adjacency recall at comparable precision than standard constraint-based methods. Overall, TS-BOSS offers a high-performing, scalable approach for time series causal discovery and our results provide a principled bridge for extending sparsity-based, permutation-driven causal learning theory to dynamic settings. 

Keywords: Causal discovery, score-based methods, time series, BIC score 

1. Introduction 

Learning the causal structure underlying observational data is fundamental across a wide range of disciplines, from policy-relevant fields such as economics and epidemiology to natural sciences including neuroscience and Earth system science. Causal structure learning methods can be broadly categorized into constraint-based and score-based methods. The former make use of conditional independence constraints learned from the data to infer causal relationships, while the latter optimize a consistently-defined score defined over the space of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Further methods exist such as restricted structural causal model (SCM) framework which employs assumptions on functional relationships and noise distributions to uncover causal relationships. See Pearl (2009); Spirtes et al. (2000); Peters et al. (2017) for details on the different approaches and Glymour et al. (2019); Squires and Uhler (2023) for a review. Often, the observational data take the form of time series, with observations at each time point influenced by past observations. The challenges specific to time series causal structure learning, or time series causal discovery , have been discussed at length (Runge et al., 2019; Camps-Valls et al., 2023). For instance, in the setting of a single multivariate time series, temporal dependence violates the i.i.d. assumption, thereby limiting the theoretical guarantees of causal discovery methods and statistical procedures more generally. Several methods spanning the different approaches for causal  

> © I.G.C. Mansilla & U. Ninad.
> arXiv:2603.05370v1 [cs.LG] 5 Mar 2026 MANSILLA NINAD

discovery have been proposed for the time series setting (Hyvärinen et al., 2010; Runge, 2020; Pamfil et al., 2020), see Assaad et al. (2022) for a survey. In this work, our focus will be the score-based approach to causal discovery, while presenting experimental comparisons to constraint-based approaches. Recently, best order score search (BOSS), a score-based method for structure learning, was introduced (Andrews et al., 2023). BOSS performs a permutation-based search over DAGs and leverages a novel data structure—grow–shrink trees (GSTs)—to cache intermediate computations. BOSS was shown to achieve high accuracy and state-of-the-art performance while maintaining scalability to a large number of nodes. We propose a time series extension of BOSS for causal discovery over multivariate time series data named 

TS-BOSS . We provide theoretical results for the soundness of TS-BOSS and ablation studies that compare TS-BOSS to the constraint-based method PCMCI+ (Runge, 2020) for time series causal discovery. Interestingly, our studies illustrate that TS-BOSS outperforms PCMCI+ in the high auto-correlation regime, and generally maintains higher adjacency recall at similar precision. This establishes TS-BOSS as a high-performing and scalable time series causal discovery method. We also provide an intermediate result (Theorem 5) that extends the result of Verma and Pearl (1990) (Theorem 2 and Corollary 2) to the time series (i.e. dynamic bayesian network) setting. This result implies that sparsest permutation-based methods for causal discovery (Raskutti and Uhler, 2018) can be extended to the time series setting under suitable stationarity assumptions. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we present the related work, and in Section 3 we provide the general background for the time series causal discovery problem. In Section 4 we present our algorithm TS-BOSS and in Section 5 we provide theoretical results that guarantee soundness of TS-BOSS. In Section 6 we present a simulation study on synthetic data and conclude with a discussion in Section 7. 

2. Related work 

Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) was an influential early method in score-based causal discovery which leveraged Meek’s conjecture to search greedily over equivalence classes of DAGs (Chickering, 2003). Causal discovery was presented as a search problem over permutations that yield the sparsest DAG in Raskutti and Uhler (2018) with the sparsest permutation (SP) algorithm. Solus et al. (2021); Lam et al. (2022) proposed greedy score-based approaches for the permutation search over DAGs and Andrews et al. (2023) proposed an efficient algorithm within the same class of methods using Grow-Shrink trees. Zheng et al. (2018) algorithm presented the search over space of DAGs as a continuous optimization problem, and Pamfil et al. (2020) extended this work to the dynamic setting. Several other continuous optimization-based methods and perspectives thereon have been proposed since then (Bello et al., 2022; Reisach et al., 2021; Ng et al., 2024). Recently, Wienöbst et al. (2025) proposed a discrete-search based method using a modified grow-shrink procedure that provides significant speed-up as graph size increases. In the dynamic setting, Runge (2020) proposed a constraint-based causal discovery algorithm for time series using a modified conditional independence (CI) test to mitigate the effects of ill-calibrated CI tests in the single multivariate time series setting while allowing for contemporaneous edges. In Malinsky and Spirtes (2018), a hybrid constraint and score-based method for time series causal discovery with latent confounders was introduced, that uses GES as a model selection step.         

> 2LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH

3. Time Series Causal Discovery 

3.1. Preliminaries and Problem Setup 

Let Xt = ( X1 

> t

, . . . , X mt ) denote a vector of m random variables observed at discrete time points 

t ∈ Z. The collection (Xt)t∈Z is called a multivariate time series . We assume that dynamical processes that are representable as multivariate time series can be modeled as a time series SCM (or ts-SCM): 

Xjt := f j (Pa (Xjt ), η jt ) ∀ Xjt ∈ Xt and ∀ t ∈ Z , (1) with ‘ := ’ denoting structural assignments. Here, each f j denotes the causal mechanism correspond-ing to Xjt that models each Xjt in terms of the parents of Xjt , denoted by Pa (Xjt ), and the random variable ηjt which is the noise associated to Xjt . For each t ∈ Z, the noises ηt = ( η1 

> t

, . . . , η mt )

are assumed to be jointly independent. Furthermore, for each i ∈ [m], the noises ηi = ( ηit)t∈Z

are assumed to be i.i.d.. The time series SCM Eq. (1) entails a time series graph with nodes Xit

for all i ∈ [m] and for all t ∈ Z, and directed edges from a node Xit to a node Xjt′ if and only if 

Xit ∈ Pa (Xjt′ ), for all i, j ∈ [n] and t, t ′ ∈ Z such that (i, t )̸ = ( j, t ′). The condition (i, t )̸ = ( j, t ′)

excludes self-cycles in the time series graph, and we additionally exclude general directed cycles. The resultant graph is referred to as a time series directed acyclic graph or a ts-DAG (Gerhardus, 2024). The concept of d-separation of two disjoint sets of vertices given a third extends naturally to ts-DAGs if the sets are finite. Given finite disjoint subsets S1, S2, S3 of (Xt)t∈Z, we denote the statement S1 is d-separated of S2 given S3 in a ts-DAG Gts as S1 ⊥⊥d S2 | S3.In this work, the focus is causal discovery of the ts-DAG Gts , entailed by SCM 1 underlying the multivariate time series (Xt)t∈Z. We make the following assumptions relating graphical d-separation in Gts and (conditional) independence statements of a finite collection of random variables Xit to enable causal discovery. Following the notation of Hochsprung et al. (2024), we denote finite disjoint subsets I1, I 2, I 3 ⊂ [m] × Z and corresponding finite disjoint subsets Sm = {Xit : ( i, t ) ∈ Im} for 

m = {1, 2, 3}.

Assumption 1 (Time series local Markov property) For every Xit ∈ (Xt)t∈Z and every finite set 

I1, such that I1 contains no descendant of Xit , Xit ⊥⊥ I1|Pa (Xit ), where parents and descendants are defined w.r.t. Gts .

Assumption 2 (Time series faithfulness property) For any finite disjoint sets I1, I 2, I 3 ⊂ [m] × Z,if S1 ⊥⊥ S2 | S3, then S1 ⊥⊥d S2 | S3 in Gts .

Furthermore, the requirement that noises ηt = ( η1 

> t

, . . . , η mt ) are jointly independent imposes causal sufficiency , namely there are no latent confounders. For two nodes Xis, X jt in Gts such that s ≤ t

and Xis ∈ Pa (Xjt ) , the difference τ = t − s is referred to as the time lag corresponding to the edge 

Xis → Xjt . In accordance with the time-series SCM formulation, causal relationships are restricted to respect the temporal order of the data, such that variables at future time points cannot be parents of variables at earlier time points. Note that we allow for zero time lags (i.e. contemporaneous edges), in order to account for insufficient time resolution of the time series (Runge et al., 2023). 

Assumption 3 (Maximum time lag) The time-series causal graph Gts is assumed to have a known finite maximum time lag τmax ≥ 0, such that every edge in Gts has an associated time lag τ ≤ τmax .

Assumption 4 (Stationary causal structure) The causal structure of ts-SCM 1 is stationary , namely the causal mechanisms f i corresponding to Xit in (1) remain constant for all t ∈ Z. 

> 3MANSILLA NINAD

Assumption 4 implies that the ts-DAG Gts entailed by ts-SCM 1 has the repeating edge property 

whereby the edges with an arrowhead on (or incident on) Xt for any t ∈ Z are sufficient to reconstruct the entire causal graph Gts (Gerhardus, 2024). Xt, for an arbitrary t, will be referred to as the contemporaneous slice of time series (Xt)t∈Z. By Assumption 3 and 4, we can conclude that the following target object of time series causal discovery yields Gts (Assaad et al., 2022). 

Definition 1 (Window causal graph) Let τmax be the maximum time lag ts-DAG Gts and W := [t − τmax , t ] be a time window for an arbitrary t ∈ Z over the set of discrete time indices. Then, the finite index set IW = [ m] × W , results in the finite set of vertices SW = {Xit : ( i, t ) ∈ IW } in the ts-DAG Gts . The induced graph over the set SW is defined as the window causal graph (or simply window graph) and denoted by GW .

3.2. Causal Discovery with Single versus Multiple Multivariate Time Series 

Time series causal discovery is commonly studied in two formats: the multiple time series setting, where multiple independent multivariate time series with same underling ts-SCM are observed, and the sliding-window setting, where a single dependent multivariate series is converted into data over time windows with a known maximum lag (Runge, 2020; Manten et al., 2025; Wieck-Sosa et al., 2025). In both cases, the central problem is identifying the parents of the contemporaneous slice in the resulting window graph, since Assumption 4 ensures the reconstruction of the time series graph once the window graph is known. While consistency of the Bayesian scoring criterion (BSC), employed as the score in score-based causal discovery, in the multiple time series setting follows relatively directly from standard i.i.d. arguments, it is more delicate in the sliding-window setting due to sample dependence, though recent works have established consistency for the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) under certain assumptions (Bardet et al., 2021). Here, we focus on this shared window-graph discovery problem while assuming score consistency (Assumption 5), and present a comparison of the single versus multiple time series data with BIC score in our experimental analysis (Section 6). 

4. TS-BOSS 

4.1. Overview of BOSS 

Score-based causal discovery selects a DAG by optimizing a score that trades off goodness-of-fit and complexity; under score consistency and decomposability, improvements in the global score translate into locally consistent decisions about adding or removing individual parent-child relationships (see Definition 5 and 6 in Chickering (2003) for details on score consistency). Permutation-based methods exploit this structure by searching over variable permutations rather than the full DAG space: for each permutation, one can associate a unique subgraph-minimal DAG consistent with that order (Corollary 2 in Verma and Pearl (1990)), reducing the search to identifying an optimal permutation and its induced minimal graph. BOSS operationalizes this in two stages: in Phase 1 it performs a permutation search by repeatedly finding a variable’s best position in the ordering and constructing the corresponding DAG efficiently via grow–shrink trees (illustrated in Fig. 1 and 2); and in Phase 2 it applies a backward equivalence search (BES, also second phase of GES) to perform edge deletions that improve the score which guarantees asymptotic correctness.         

> 4LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH

Figure 1: An overview of the grow algorithm presented in Andrews et al. (2023). Given a target variable a and a permutation π, the grow phase builds a’s candidate parent set by evaluating each available variable as a possible addition to the parent set and constructing branches on those that strictly improve a’s score. It then sorts these branches by the resulting (post-addition) grow score and chooses the best-ranked branch permissible by the order of 

π, that variable is added as a parent; the procedure continues until no further improving variable from the prefix of π can can be added to a’s parent set. 

4.2. TS-BOSS Pseudocode and Adaptation Challenges 

In the following we present the adaptation idea behind TS-BOSS, and present a pseudocode in Algorithm 1. We note here that the challenges of adaptation to time series and our proposed solution are common to most discrete-search score-based methods and thus their application is not limited to extensions of BOSS. Let (Xt)t∈Z denote a stationary multivariate time series with maximum time lag τmax ∈ N. To recover the window causal graph up to its Markov equivalence class, TS-BOSS proceeds in two phases. 

First Phase of TS-BOSS. The first phase extends the permutation search and grow–shrink proce-dure of BOSS via the following modifications: • Time-window unrolling. For a fixed τmax , the time series is unrolled into the variable set 

{Xt−τmax , . . . , Xt}, where Xt = ( X1 

> t

, . . . , X mt ).

• Temporal order constraint in permutations Temporal order is enforced in time series: lagged variables must precede contemporaneous variables. Using the notation of Andrews et al. (2023), the lagged variables must be always placed in early positions than the contemporaneous, permutations take the form 

π = ( Xt−τmax , . . . , Xt−1

| {z }

> fixed across permutations

, Xt). 

> 5MANSILLA NINAD

Figure 2: An overview of the shrink algorithm presented in Andrews et al. (2023). After the grow phase, the parent set can include redundant variables, for instance, those that became redundant once other parents were added. The shrink phase prunes this set by iteratively removing any parent whose deletion improves the score, repeating until no further score-improving removals are possible. • Restricted permutation search space. Under stationarity, the causal structure is invariant over time. Hence, only edges from lagged variables to Xt and edges within Xt must be determined. The permutation search is therefore restricted to contemporaneous variables: only contemporaneous variables are permuted and grow–shrink trees are constructed only for nodes in Xt, while including lagged variables as candidate parents. We now formalize the first phase of TS-BOSS. Algorithm 1 presents the complete pseudocode, following the structure of BOSS (Andrews et al., 2023) with the time-series adaptations described above. The algorithm relies on several auxiliary subroutines, which we briefly describe for com-pleteness. The subroutine Unroll restructures the time series into a lag-unrolled representation, in which the variables {Xit−τ }τmax   

> τ=0

are treated as distinct nodes for scoring and permutation search. The grow–shrink procedure GST and the projection step Project follow the corresponding routines in BOSS (Andrews et al., 2023). The routine BestTSMove extends the BOSS best _move subroutine by restricting the permutation search to admissible contemporaneous positions (see Algorithm 2). Finally, the subroutine TSDAGtoTSCPDAG constructs the TS-CPDAG from the induced TS-DAG by applying the procedure described in Appendix B. 

Second Phase of TS-BOSS In order to prove that the resulting window graph is the most minimal graph that describes the data (i.e. it fulfills Assumption 2 with respect to the time series), the first phase of TS-BOSS must be supplemented with a time series adaptation if the backward equivalence search (TS-BES). TS-BES operates analogously to BES in the static setting with the difference that         

> 6LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH

Algorithm 1: TS-BOSS (First Phase) 

Input: Time series data D, maximum lag τmax ≥ 0

Output: Estimated TS-CPDAG bG

bD ← Unroll (D, τ max ) // Unroll time series data 

π ←  Xt−τmax , . . . , Xt−1, Xt

 // Initialize permutation 

T ← { GST (Xit , bD)}mi=1 // Initialize GS trees for Xt

improved ← True // Flag controlling permutation search 

while improved do 

sbest ← T .Score (π) // Evaluate score of current permutation 

improved ← False 

for i ← 1 to m do 

π′ ← BestTSMove (T , π, X it ) // Only contemporaneous variables 

if T .Score (π′) > s best then 

π ← π′ // Update permutation 

improved ← True 

break end end end 

G ← T .Project (π) // TS-DAG induced by permutation π

bG ← TSDAGtoTSCPDAG (G) // Compute TS-CPDAG of G

return bG

the neighboring window graphs in the search space correspond to those whose parent sets for the nodes in the contemporaneous slice are fewer. 

5. Theoretical Results 

In this section, we present results that guarantee correctness of TS-BOSS in the large sample limit. 

Assumption 5 We assume access to: (i) a locally consistent Bayesian scoring criterion B for DAGs and, (ii) i.i.d. data D for nodes SW in the window graph GW , see definition 1. 

Haughton (1988) has shown that for distributions that are in the curved exponential family, eg. mul-tivariate Gaussian distributions, the Bayesian scoring criterion equals the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) plus a constant error term that becomes insignificant in the large sample limit. We use the BIC score in our TS-BOSS implementation. In order to employ permutation-search over window causal graph, we will now introduce a few definitions for the time series setting. In the following, we refer to a permutation π over SW as an admissible permutation if it respects time order, i.e., for the ith vertex in π called πi ∈ SW , all vertices that precede πi in π, denoted by Pre (i, π ) = {πj : 1 ≤ j < i }, have time indices less than or equal to the time index of πi. Furthermore, the joint probability distribution over the variables SW

is denoted by PW , and it satisfies the graphoid axioms (Verma and Pearl, 1990).  

> 7MANSILLA NINAD

Algorithm 2: BestTSMove 

Input: Grow–shrink trees T , permutation π, contemporaneous variable Xit

Output: Updated permutation πpos ← m · τmax // Starting index of contemporaneous block 

sbest ← T .Score (π)

j ← π. index (Xit ) // Current position of Xit

for k ← 1 to m do 

π ← π. move (Xit , pos + k) // Move Xit within contemporaneous block 

if T .Score (π) > s best then 

sbest ← T .Score (π)

j ← pos + k

end end 

π ← π. move (Xit , j ) // Place Xit at best position 

return π

Definition 2 (Permutation-induced window graph) Let PW be a graphoid over variables SW

associated with the window graph GW . Each admissible permutation π of SW induces a DAG Gπ

> W

over SW defined as follows: (i) Let t be the maximal time index of all the variables in π. For each Xit ∈ SW and each 

Xjs ∈ Pre (Xit , π ), if Xit̸ ⊥⊥ Xjs | Pre (Xit , π ) \ { Xjs }, then Xjs → Xit in Gπ 

> W

,(ii) For all variable indices i, j , time indices t′ < t in π and s′ ≥ 0, there exists an edge 

Xjt′−s′ → Xit′ in Gπ 

> W

if and only if Xjt−s′ → Xit was found in (i) above. 

Condition (i) in definition 2 constructs the edges incident into the variables at the maximal time index (also known as the ‘contemporaneous slice’ in the window graph), and is analogous to the method discussed in Raskutti and Uhler (2018). Condition (ii) is needed in order to satisfy time-shift invariance (Assumption 4) that is implicit in the definition of a valid window graph. We use the term 

stationary graph for any window graph that satisfies condition (ii). 

Definition 3 (Window Markov property) A graphoid P and a window graph G over variables 

SW is said to satisfy the window Markov property if for all Xit ∈ SW , Xit ⊥⊥ Nd (Xit )G|Pa (Xit )G

for all i and the maximal time index t in G. Here Nd (·)G refers to the set of non-descendants in the graph G.

From assumptions 1, 3, 4 and definition 3 it follows that if a ts-DAG Gts satisfies the local Markov property with respect to a multivariate time series, then its corresponding window graph GW satisfies the window Markov property with respect to the graphoid induced over SW and vice-versa. 

Definition 4 (Window subgraph minimality) Let a graph GW over vertices SW satisfy the window Markov property w.r.t. a graphoid PW . Then GW is said to be window subgraph minimal if no stationary subgraph of GW satisfies the window Markov property. 

For an overview on subgraph minimality (also known as the minimal I-MAP characterization) in the non-time series setting, see Pearl (1988); Verma and Pearl (1990); Raskutti and Uhler (2018). Assumption 4 implies if a window graph satisfies window subgraph minimality then the corresponding ts-DAG satisfies subgraph minimality with respect to time series local Markov property.         

> 8LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH

Theorem 5 (Permutation-induced window graph minimality) Let PW be a graphoid over SW

and Gπ 

> W

be a window graph induced from an admissible permutation π. Then Gπ 

> W

satisfies the window Markov property and is window subgraph minimal. 

All proofs are relegated to Appendix A. In the following result, subgraph minimality for a ts-DAG refers to minimality w.r.t. the time series local Markov property, see explanation after definition 4. 

Lemma 6 Let assumptions 1-5 be satisfied for data D and ts-DAG Gts resulting from a ts-SCM over time series (Xt)t∈Z, and a Bayesian scoring criterion B(G, D) over DAGs G. Then the output graph of phase 1 of TS-BOSS over data D with score B(G, D) satisfies time series local Markov property w.r.t. (Xt)t∈Z and is subgraph minimal in the large sample limit. 

Finally, the following result guarantess the asymptotic correctness of TS-BOSS. 

Lemma 7 Let assumptions 1-4 be satisfied for data D and ts-DAG Gts resulting from a ts-SCM over time series (Xt)t∈Z. Let bGts be a ts-DAG that satisfies the time series local Markov property w.r.t. (Xt)t∈Z. Then TS-BES with input graph bGts , and a Bayesian scoring criterion B(G, D) and time series data D that satisfies Assumption 5, returns the MEC of the true window causal graph 

GW of the ts-DAG Gts in the large sample limit. 

6. Simulation Study 

6.1. Data Generation 

Synthetic data are generated from multivariate linear time-series structural causal models (SCMs). Each variable follows a structural equation of the form 

Xjt := X  

> Xit−τ∈Pa( Xjt)

a(τ ) 

> ij

Xit−τ + εjt ,

where a(τ ) 

> ij

∈ R and εjt are mutually independent Gaussian noise terms with zero mean. The contemporaneous graph (induced graph for nodes with τ = 0 ) is acyclic. Self-links at positive lags permit temporal dependence. Non-stationary parameterizations are discarded. A burn-in period is simulated and removed to ensure convergence to the stationary regime before collecting the final sample. 

6.2. Models 

We compare the following methods: (i) TS-BOSS : the proposed permutation-based score method adapted to time series by enforcing temporal ordering constraints ; (ii) TS-BOSS (i.i.d.) : TS-BOSS applied to independently sampled trajectories obtained by generating multiple realizations of the same time-series SCM and extracting one window of length corresponding to τmax from each realization, ensuring independence across samples and isolating the effect of temporal dependence. (iii) PCMCI+ Runge (2020): a constraint-based method for time-series causal discovery based on conditional independence testing, included for comparative evaluation. For TS-BOSS methods, we present simulations for phase 1, as in Andrews et al. (2023). 

> 9

MANSILLA NINAD 

Precision = T P T P + F P 

Recall = T P T P + F N 

True graph Estimated graph Adjacency Orientation 

a ← b a ← b TP TP,TN 

a ← b a → b TP FP,FN 

a ← b a ◦−◦ b TP FN 

a ← b a . . . b FN FN 

a ◦−◦ b a ← b TP FP 

a ◦−◦ b a → b TP FP 

a ◦−◦ b a ◦−◦ b TP TN 

a ◦−◦ b a . . . b FN TN 

a . . . b a ← b FP FP 

a . . . b a → b FP FP 

a . . . b a ◦−◦ b FP –

a . . . b a . . . b TN –

Table 1: Adjacency and orientation evaluation met-rics. Orientation is evaluated only for con-temporaneous edges. 

6.3. Evaluation Metrics 

We report adjacency precision and recall, orientation precision and recall, and runtime. Estimated graphs are compared to the ground-truth CPDAG. The evaluation metrics for adjacency and orien-tation extend the protocol of Andrews et al. (2023) are provided in Table 1. Further details on the evaluation protocol and an extended explanation of Table 1 are provided in Appendix C. 

6.4. Experimental Setup 

Default values for the data generation process and model parameters are given in Table 2. Unless otherwise specified, all experiments use this configuration and results are averaged over K randomly generated graphs per setting. 

Parameter Default value Number of variables (nodes) N 5Sample size T 1000 Number of graphs per setting K 100 Coefficient distribution discrete in [−0.5, 0.5] 

Graph density d 1.5 Number of links L ⌊d × N ⌋

% of contemporaneous links 0.3 Autocorrelation parameter a 0.3 Autocorrelation sampling U ([min(0 .1, a − 0.3) , a ]) 

Maximum true time lag τmax 3Maximum time lag (models) lag max τmax 

Transient (burn-in) length 0.2 × T

PCMCI+ significance level α = 0 .01 

PCMCI+ contemporaneous rule Majority 

Table 2: Default experimental parameters used throughout the simulation study. 

10 LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH 

6.5. Results 

Figure 3 summarizes the experimental results under the different parameter settings considered in this study. 

(a) Effect of varying sample size ( T ). (b) Effect of varying graph density ( d). 

(c) Effect of varying number of nodes ( N ). (d) Effect of varying autocorrelation ( a). Figure 3: Experimental results for TS-BOSS, TS-BOSS (i.i.d.), and PCMCI+ under varying parame-ter settings. In Figure 3( a), increasing the sample size T improves recall and orientation metrics for all methods, as expected due to the larger amount of available information. TS-BOSS achieves consis-tently higher adjacency recall than PCMCI+, whereas PCMCI+ attains higher adjacency precision. Orientation recall is also consistently higher for TS-BOSS, while orientation precision for PCMCI+ approaches that of TS-BOSS at larger sample sizes. In terms of runtime, TS-BOSS remains sub-stantially faster than PCMCI+ across all values of T and appears only mildly affected by increasing sample size. Figure 3( b) shows the effect of increasing the graph density d. For this experiment, PCMCI+ was also run with a significance level of α = 0 .05 . As d increases, adjacency and orientation precision improve for all methods, while adjacency recall decreases, reflecting the increasing difficulty of the recovery problem in denser graphs. Running PCMCI+ with α = 0 .05 trades precision for recall, but still does not outperform TS-BOSS in adjacency recall. Runtime scales with density, and PCMCI+ is consistently slower. As shown in Figure 3( c), increasing the number of nodes N leads to higher runtime for all methods. For TS-BOSS, this is due to the growth of the permutation search space, while PCMCI+ exhibits an even steeper increase, driven by the growing number of conditional independence tests. As  

> 11 MANSILLA NINAD

graph size increases, adjacency precision declines. For orientation precision, PCMCI+ outperforms TS-BOSS from N ≥ 7. In contrast, adjacency and orientation recall remain largely stable across graph sizes. Overall, TS-BOSS maintains higher recall across all N .Finally, Figure 3( d) illustrates the effect of increasing the autocorrelation parameter a. In this experiment, the transient length is increased to 10 × T to ensure stationarity. PCMCI+ attains higher adjacency precision, but its adjacency recall decreases with stronger autocorrelation, whereas TS-BOSS remains stable and consistently achieves higher recall. Orientation precision shows only minor variation across methods and remains consistently high, without a clear dominance of any method. In contrast, orientation recall remains stable as a increases, with TS-BOSS consistently attaining the highest recall. 

7. Discussion and Outlook 

We present TS-BOSS, an extension of score-based structure learning method BOSS to multivariate time series. We show that TS-BOSS outperforms the constraint-based baseline method PCMCI+ in the high autocorrelation regime. This suggests that permutation-based score search with efficient caching can remain effective when strong sample dependence degrades the behavior of conditional independence testing. We presented theoretical guarantees of TS-BOSS under the i.i.d. window data setting, while illustrating with simulations that non-i.i.d. data from sliding windows over a single multivariate time series does not hamper TS-BOSS performance. An important advantage of constraint-based causal discovery is that it can more directly ac-commodate violations of orientation faithfulness (Ramsey et al., 2006). Score-based methods, by contrast, may be less transparent in how such violations affect the selected graph. On the other hand, permutation-based search appears more amenable to parallelization: scoring candidate parent sets and evaluating local changes can be distributed across nodes in a permutation, which may offer additional scalability benefits for large time series systems. More broadly, the constraint-based and score-based paradigms impose different methodological bottlenecks in single multivariate time series settings. Constraint-based approaches rely on well-calibrated conditional independence tests under temporal dependence of samples, while score-based approaches require theoretical guarantees—e.g., score consistency—tailored to dynamic Bayesian network structure learning. Each set of requirements is nontrivial in practice and motivates further theoretical work. Our ablation studies provide evidence that increasing sample dependence differentially influences the performance of competing approaches and underline the need for further theoretical guarantees in the single multivariate time series setting. 

References 

Bryan Andrews, Joseph Ramsey, Rubén Sánchez-Romero, Jazmin Camchong, and Erich Kummerfeld. Fast scalable and accurate discovery of dags using the best order score search and grow-shrink trees. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran Associates Inc. Charles K. Assaad, Emilie Devijver, and Eric Gaussier. Survey and evaluation of causal discovery methods for time series. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 73:767–819, Feb 2022. doi: 10.1613/jair.1.13428. URL https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.13428 .        

> 12 LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH

Jean-Marc Bardet, Kamila Kare, and William Kengne. Efficient and consistent data-driven model selection for time series. Submitted to the Annals of Statistics , 2021. arXiv:2110.09785v1. Kevin Bello, Bryon Aragam, and Pradeep K. Ravikumar. Dagma: Learning dags via m-matrices and a log-determinant acyclicity characterization. In A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (NeurIPS 2022) , pages 8226–8239. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/ hash/076d5c6c6c9c3a18b5f3e89e3297d1e4-Abstract-Conference.html .Gustau Camps-Valls, Andreas Gerhardus, Urmi Ninad, Gherardo Varando, Georg Martius, Emili Balaguer-Ballester, Ricardo Vinuesa, Emiliano Diaz, Laure Zanna, and Jakob Runge. Discovering causal relations and equations from data. Physics Reports , 1044:1–68, 2023. ISSN 0370-1573. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2023.10.005. URL https://www.sciencedirect. com/science/article/pii/S0370157323003411 . Discovering causal relations and equations from data. David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3:507–554, 2003. doi: 10.1162/153244303321897717. URL https:// jmlr.org/papers/v3/chickering02b.html .Andreas Gerhardus. Characterization of causal ancestral graphs for time series with latent con-founders. The Annals of Statistics , 52(1):103–130, February 2024. doi: 10.1214/23-AOS2262. Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, and Peter Spirtes. Review of causal discovery methods based on graphical models. Frontiers in Genetics , 10:524, 2019. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00524. Dominique M. A. Haughton. On the choice of a model to fit data from an exponential family. Annals of Statistics , 16(1):342–355, 1988. doi: 10.1214/aos/1176350709. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1214/aos/1176350709 .Tom Hochsprung, Jakob Runge, and Andreas Gerhardus. A global markov property for solutions of stochastic difference equations and the corresponding full time graphs. In The 40th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=o5pOj2IDYB .Aapo Hyvärinen, Kun Zhang, Shohei Shimizu, and Patrik O. Hoyer. Estimation of a structural vector autoregression model using non-gaussianity. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11:1709– 1731, 2010. URL https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v11/hyvarinen10a.html .Wai-Yin Lam, Bryan Andrews, and Joseph Ramsey. Greedy relaxations of the sparsest per-mutation algorithm. In James Cussens and Kun Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , volume 180 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1052–1062. PMLR, 01–05 Aug 2022. URL https: //proceedings.mlr.press/v180/lam22a.html .Daniel Malinsky and Peter Spirtes. Causal structure learning from multivariate time series in settings with unmeasured confounding. In Thuc Duy Le, Kun Zhang, Emre Kıcıman, Aapo Hyvärinen, and Lin Liu, editors, Proceedings of 2018 ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Causal  

> 13 MANSILLA NINAD

Disocvery , volume 92 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 23–47. PMLR, 20 Aug 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v92/malinsky18a.html .Georg Manten, Cecilia Casolo, Søren Wengel Mogensen, and Niki Kilbertus. An asymmetric independence model for causal discovery on path spaces. In Biwei Huang and Mathias Drton, editors, Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , volume 275 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 64–89. PMLR, 07–09 May 2025. URL 

https://proceedings.mlr.press/v275/manten25a.html .Christopher Meek. Causal inference and causal explanation with background knowledge, 2013. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1302.4972 .Ignavier Ng, Biwei Huang, and Kun Zhang. Structure learning with continuous optimization: A sober look and beyond. In Francesco Locatello and Vanessa Didelez, editors, Proceedings of the Third Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , volume 236 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 71–105. PMLR, 01–03 Apr 2024. URL https://proceedings. mlr.press/v236/ng24a.html .Roxana Pamfil, Nisara Sriwattanaworachai, Shaan Desai, Philip Pilgerstorfer, Konstantinos Geor-gatzis, Paul Beaumont, and Bryon Aragam. Dynotears: Structure learning from time-series data. In Silvia Chiappa and Roberto Calandra, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty Third In-ternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1595–1605. PMLR, 26–28 Aug 2020. URL https: //proceedings.mlr.press/v108/pamfil20a.html .Judea Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference . Morgan Kaufmann Series in Representation and Reasoning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1988. ISBN 1558604790. Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference . Cambridge University Press, USA, 2nd edition, 2009. ISBN 052189560X. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511803161. Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of Causal Inference: Foundations and Learning Algorithms . The MIT Press, 2017. ISBN 9780262037310. Joseph Ramsey, Peter Spirtes, and Jiji Zhang. Adjacency-faithfulness and conservative causal infer-ence. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence ,UAI’06, page 401–408, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2006. AUAI Press. ISBN 0974903922. Garvesh Raskutti and Caroline Uhler. Learning directed acyclic graph models based on sparsest permutations. Stat , 7(1):e183, 2018. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/sta4.183. URL https:// onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sta4.183 . e183 sta4.183. Alexander Reisach, Christof Seiler, and Sebastian Weichwald. Beware of the simulated dag! causal discovery benchmarks may be easy to game. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelz-imer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , volume 34, pages 27772–27784. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/ file/e987eff4a7c7b7e580d659feb6f60c1a-Paper.pdf .        

> 14 LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH

Jakob Runge. Discovering contemporaneous and lagged causal relations in autocorrelated nonlinear time series datasets. In Proceedings of the 36th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI) , 2020. Jakob Runge, Sebastian Bathiany, Erik Bollt, Gustau Camps-Valls, Dim Coumou, Ethan Deyle, Clark Glymour, Marlene Kretschmer, Miguel D. Mahecha, Jordi Muñoz-Marí, Egbert H. van Nes, Jonas Peters, Rick Quax, Markus Reichstein, Marten Scheffer, Bernhard Schölkopf, Peter Spirtes, George Sugihara, Jie Sun, Kun Zhang, and Jakob Zscheischler. Inferring causation from time series in Earth system sciences. Nature Communications , 10(1):2553, June 2019. ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-10105-3. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/ s41467-019-10105-3 . Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. Jakob Runge, Andreas Gerhardus, Gherardo Varando, Veronika Eyring, and Gustau Camps-Valls. Causal inference for time series. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment , 4(7):487– 505, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s43017-023-00431-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/ s43017-023-00431-y .Liam Solus, Yu Wang, and Caroline Uhler. Consistency guarantees for greedy permutation-based causal inference algorithms. Biometrika , 108(4):795–814, 2021. doi: 10.1093/biomet/asaa104. Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search . MIT Press, 2 edition, 2000. Chandler Squires and Caroline Uhler. Causal structure learning: A combinatorial perspective. Founda-tions of Computational Mathematics , 23(5):1781–1815, 2023. doi: 10.1007/s10208-022-09581-9. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10208-022-09581-9 .Thomas Verma and Judea Pearl. Causal networks: Semantics and expressiveness. In Ross D. Shachter, Tod S. Levitt, Laveen N. Kanal, and John F. Lemmer, editors, Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , volume 9 of Machine Intelligence and Pattern Recognition , pages 69–76. North-Holland, 1990. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-88650-7.50011-1. URL https:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444886507500111 .Michael Wieck-Sosa, Michel F. C. Haddad, and Aaditya Ramdas. Conditional independence testing with a single realization of a multivariate nonstationary nonlinear time series, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21647 .Marcel Wienöbst, Leonard Henckel, and Sebastian Weichwald. Embracing discrete search: A reasonable approach to causal structure learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2510.04970 .Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep K. Ravikumar, and Eric P. Xing. Dags with no tears: Continuous optimization for structure learning. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems 31 (NeurIPS 2018) , pages 9472–9483. Curran Asso-ciates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/ e347c51419ffb23ca3fd5050202f9c3d-Abstract.html .

> 15

MANSILLA NINAD 

Appendix A. Proofs 

In this section, we present proofs for theoretical results presented in Section 5. 

Theorem 5 (Permutation-induced window graph minimality) Let PW be a graphoid over SW

and Gπ 

> W

be a window graph induced from an admissible permutation π. Then Gπ 

> W

satisfies the window Markov property and is window subgraph minimal. 

Proof For the permutation π one can construct the induced DAG following the strategy RU defined in Lam et al. (2022) and motivated from Raskutti and Uhler (2018), without distinguishing between time indices. It follows that the graph GRU = RU (π) is such that Gπ 

> W

⊆ G RU , where there may be additional edges in GRU due to common confounders of window variables SW lying outside the window. Additionally, for each i and the maximal time index t in π, Pa (Xit )GRU =

Pa (Xit )Gπ 

> W

, because the edges incident into the contemporaneous slice have been found using the same strategy in both methods. Further Nd (Xit )GRU = Nd (Xit )Gπ 

> W

because the permutation π

was admissible and thus all variables preceding the variables in the contemporaneous slice cannot be their descendants. From Theorem 2 in Verma and Pearl (1990), it follows that GRU satisfies 

Xit ⊥⊥ Nd (Xit )GRU | Pa (Xit )GRU ⇒ Xit ⊥⊥ Nd (Xit )Gπ 

> W

| Pa (Xit )Gπ 

> W

. Thus, Gπ 

> W

satisfies window Markov property. For the subgraph minimality proof, assume the contrary, namely that there exists a stationary subgraph Hπ 

> W

⊂ G π 

> W

that satisfies the window Markov property. Stationarity of the graph implies that Pa (Xit )Hπ 

> W

⊂ Pa (Xit )Gπ 

> W

. Let Dit := Pa (Xit )Gπ 

> W

\ Pa (Xit )Hπ 

> W

. For all Xjt′ ∈ Dit, Xjt′ ∈ Nd (Xit )Hπ

> W

because if it were a descendant of Xit in Hπ 

> W

, it would also be a descendant of Xit in Gπ 

> W

which would violate acyclicity. From window Markovianity of Hπ 

> W

we have Dit ⊥⊥ Xit | Pa (Xit )Hπ 

> W

. By the weak union property of the graphoid axioms we have Xjt′ ⊥⊥ Xit | (Pa (Xit )Hπ 

> W

∪ (Dit \ Xjt′ )) 

which is equivalent to Xjt′ ⊥⊥ Xit | (Pa (Xit )Gπ 

> W

\ Xjt′ ). However, this would contradict condition (i) in definition 2. Therefore, Gπ 

> W

must be window subgraph minimal. 

Lemma 6 Let assumptions 1-5 be satisfied for data D and ts-DAG Gts resulting from a ts-SCM over time series (Xt)t∈Z, and a Bayesian scoring criterion B(G, D) over DAGs. Then the output graph of phase 1 of TS-BOSS over data D with score B(G, D) satisfies time series local Markov property w.r.t. (Xt)t∈Z and is subgraph minimal in the large sample limit. 

Proof Suppose not, then the output ts-DAG cGts of phase 1 of TS-BOSS is such that there exists an Xjs ∈ Nd (Xit ) cGts such that Xit̸ ⊥⊥ Xjs | Pa (Xit ) cGts . From assumptions 1, 3 and 4, it follows that there exists a that is a non-descendant in the window graph violates the window Markov property. W.l.o.g. let this variable be Xjs . Consider the last permutation in phase 1 before the permutation search terminates because no score improvement can be found. Local score consistency of B(G, D),i.e. Assumption 5, implies that the ts-DAG that results from adding edge Xjs → Xit when computing the permutation-induced graph, has a higher score than for a ts-DAG without this edge, therefore the first phase cannot terminate at cGts .

Lemma 7 Let assumptions 1-4 be satisfied for data D and ts-DAG Gts resulting from a ts-SCM over time series (Xt)t∈Z. Let bGts be a ts-DAG that satisfies the time series local Markov property w.r.t. (Xt)t∈Z. Then TS-BES with input graph bGts , and a Bayesian scoring criterion B(G, D) and time series data D that satisfies Assumption 5, returns the MEC of the true window causal graph GW

of the ts-DAG Gts in the large sample limit. 

16 LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH 

Proof TS-BES takes as input the graph bGts . Let dGW be the corresponding window graph and GW

be the true window graph. Suppose GW ⊂ dGW . For both these graphs consider only the edges incident into the contemporaneous slice because TS-BES attempts deletion of these edges only by Assumption 3 and 4. Following the proof of soundness of BES in Chickering (2003), we note that Theorem 4 therein, namely the Meek conjecture, implies that the the true GW can be obtained from the estimated dGW with a sequence of edge deletions and covered edge reversals. Consider the last graph H in the sequence from GW to dGW which has fewer edges than dGW . By Assumption 5, H has a higher score than dGW , thus TS-BES cannot terminate at dGW .

Appendix B. Construction of the TS-CPDAG from a TS-DAG 

Given a TS-DAG, the corresponding Time Series CPDAG (TS-CPDAG) is constructed by first rendering all edges unoriented. The orientation of all lagged edges is then fixed, since temporal order uniquely determines their direction. Next, we orient all colliders, including both contemporaneous colliders and mixed-time colliders. A mixed-time collider refers to a v-structure of the form 

Xt−τ → Yt ← Zt,

where one parent is lagged and the other contemporaneous. We then apply Meek’s rule R1 Meek (2013) to unshielded triples involving both lagged and contemporaneous edges, preventing the introduction of additional mixed-time colliders. Finally, the Meek rules R1–R3 Meek (2013) are applied to the contemporaneous subgraph until no further orientations are possible. 

Appendix C. Evaluation Metrics 

In the original BOSS paper Andrews et al. (2023), performance metrics are computed by comparing the estimated graph to the ground-truth DAG. As the estimated graph is a TS-CPDAG, the true TS-DAG is first converted into the corresponding TS-CPDAG (Appendix B) and all metrics are computed by comparing CPDAGs. To enable evaluation at the TS-CPDAG level, the adjacency and orientation metrics introduced in Andrews et al. (2023) are extended to account for undirected edges as follows. 

Adjacency Evaluation. Adjacency precision and recall are computed by checking the existence of an edge between two nodes, independently of its orientation. Since adjacency evaluation only tests whether an edge exists, the presence of undirected edges in the CPDAG does not alter the definition relative to the DAG-based evaluation in Andrews et al. (2023). The extension to CPDAGs is therefore immediate. 

Orientation Evaluation. For orientation, we adopt the arrowhead-based criterion introduced in Andrews et al. (2023). For each ordered pair (a, b ) and lag τ = 0 , orientation is evaluated locally by checking whether the edge between a and b contains an arrowhead into node a. The arrowhead check is performed separately for each node of every edge. Let I→a(b) denote the indicator function defined as 

I→a(b) = 

(

1 if the edge between a and b contains an arrowhead into a, 

0 otherwise.  

> 17 MANSILLA NINAD

Orientation counts are then defined as: • TP: Itrue 

> →a

(b) = 1 and Iest 

> →a

(b) = 1 ,• FP: Itrue 

> →a

(b) = 0 and Iest 

> →a

(b) = 1 ,• FN: Itrue 

> →a

(b) = 1 and Iest 

> →a

(b) = 0 ,• TN: Itrue 

> →a

(b) = 0 and Iest 

> →a

(b) = 0 .Compared to Andrews et al. (2023), the evaluation must be extended to handle undirected edges in the true CPDAG. If the true graph contains an undirected edge a ◦−◦ b, then Itrue 

> →a

(b) = 0 , since no arrowhead is present. Consequently, predicting no arrowhead into a is counted as correct. Table 3 extends the comparison presented in Table 1 to provide the full orientation evaluation from the perspective of node a.True edge Estimated edge Itrue 

> →a

(b) Iest 

> →a

(b) Orientation Metric 

a ← b a ← b 1 1 TP 

a ← b a → b 1 0 FN 

a ← b a ◦−◦ b 1 0 FN 

a ← b a . . . b 1 0 FN 

a → b a ← b 0 1 FP 

a → b a → b 0 0 TN 

a → b a ◦−◦ b 0 0 TN 

a → b a . . . b 0 0 TN 

a ◦−◦ b a ← b 0 1 FP 

a ◦−◦ b a → b 0 0 TN 

a ◦−◦ b a ◦−◦ b 0 0 TN 

a ◦−◦ b a . . . b 0 0 TN 

a . . . b a ← b 0 1 FP 

a . . . b a → b 0 1 FP 

a . . . b a ◦−◦ b 0 0 -

a . . . b a . . . b 0 0 -Table 3: Orientation evaluation (arrowhead into node a) for TS-CPDAG comparison. Orientation evaluation is restricted to contemporaneous edges ( τ = 0 ), since lagged edges are uniquely oriented by temporal order. 

Appendix D. Further Simulations 

To mirror the evaluation protocol used in Andrews et al. (2023), we additionally report results comparing the true data-generating TS-DAG with the TS-CPDAG returned by each method. All simulation settings, data generation procedures, and evaluation metrics remain identical to those described in Section 6.5. The results are shown in Figure 4. 

> 18

LEARNING CAUSAL STRUCTURE OF TIME SERIES USING BEST ORDER SCORE SEARCH 

(a) Effect of varying sample size ( T ). (b) Effect of varying graph density ( d). 

(c) Effect of varying number of nodes ( N ). (d) Effect of varying autocorrelation ( a). Figure 4: Results comparing the true data-generating DAG with the CPDAG returned by TS-BOSS, TS-BOSS (i.i.d.) and PCMCI+ under varying parameter settings. 

19