Title: Tracking Equivalent Mechanistic Interpretations Across Neural Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.30002v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 01:21:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# Tracking Equivalent Mechanistic Interpretations Across Neural Networks 

Alan Sun 

Carnegie Mellon University 

alansun@andrew.cmu.edu 

Mariya Toneva 

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems 

mtoneva@mpi-sws.org 

# Abstract 

Mechanistic interpretability (MI) is an emerging framework for interpreting neural networks. Given a task and model, MI aims to discover a succinct algorithmic process, an interpretation , that explains the model’s decision process on that task. However, MI is difficult to scale and generalize. This stems in part from two key challenges: there is no precise notion of a valid interpretation; and, generating interpretations is often an ad hoc process. In this paper, we address these challenges by defining and studying the problem of interpretive equivalence :determining whether two different models share a common interpretation, without 

requiring an explicit description of what that interpretation is. At the core of our approach, we propose and formalize the principle that two interpretations of a model are equivalent if all of their possible implementations are also equivalent. We develop an algorithm to estimate interpretive equivalence and case study its use on Transformer-based models. To analyze our algorithm, we introduce necessary and sufficient conditions for interpretive equivalence based on models’ representation similarity. We provide guarantees that simultaneously relate a model’s algorithmic interpretations, circuits, and representations. Our framework lays a foundation for the development of more rigorous evaluation methods of MI and automated, generalizable interpretation discovery methods. 1

# 1 Introduction 

Ensuring the interpretability of deep neural networks is central to concerns around AI safety and trustworthiness. Among many proposed interpretation methods, mechanistic interpretability (MI) 

has recently emerged as a promising post-hoc interpretability framework 2 (Olah et al., 2020a; Elhage et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022, inter alia ). MI generally operates in two stages: (a) identifying a minimal subset of the model’s computational graph that drives functional behavior; and (b) attaching algorithmic interpretations to each of the recovered mechanisms. In contrast to other attribution-based interpretability methods, MI yields a concrete, human-interpretable algorithmic process that faithfully describes model behavior (Bereska and Gavves, 2024; Koulogeorge et al., 2025). The resulting processes can be used to better understand a model’s inductive biases which may inform further improvements (Geva et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022; Arditi et al., 2024, inter alia ). For a fixed task and network, MI approaches can be broadly categorized as either top-down or 

bottom-up (Vilas et al., 2024). Top-down methods (b → a) propose a set of high-level candidate algorithms for the task, and then attempt to align those algorithms to the network. While the alignment step can be automated and made statistically rigorous, proposing candidate algorithms is highly ad hoc. For complex tasks, it is often unclear how to even formulate plausible candidates. Additionally, alignment with a proposed algorithm is only a necessary condition for interpretability, and does not guarantee that the model truly implements the intended algorithm (Wu et al., 2023; Geiger et al., 2024; 2025; Sun et al., 2025). In contrast, bottom-up methods (a → b) first isolate mechanisms-of-interest within the model (called a circuit ) then assign interpretations to components within that circuit (Olah et al., 2020a). Although circuit discovery can be rigorously formulated as 

> 1

Our codebase can be found at https://github.com/alansun17904/interp-equiv 

> 2

An interpretability method that does not require any retraining. These methods can be applied in parallel with inference and do not compromise the model’s performance. 

1

> arXiv:2603.30002v1 [cs.LG] 31 Mar 2026

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 1: A high-level overview of our algorithmic approach to interpretive equivalence. Consider models h1, h2 that correspond to possibly unknown interpretations A1, A2 (Left) . To determine whether models h1 and h2 are interpretively equivalent, we propose a two-step procedure. First, we sample another model h⋆ that also has interpretation A1 (Center) . Second, we compare the representation similarity ( drepr ) between h1, h⋆ and h⋆, h2 (Right) . If A1, A2 are equivalent, then averaged over all implementations h⋆, we should not be able to differentiate drepr (h1, h⋆) and drepr (h⋆, h2).an optimization problem (Bhaskar et al., 2024), creating and assigning meaningful interpretations to circuits typically demand significant manual effort. Moreover, Méloux et al. (2025) has recently shown that neither top-down nor bottom-up approaches are identifiable: there exists a many-to-many relationship between high-level algorithms and circuits. This ambiguity makes it hard to verify whether a given interpretation is complete and faithful to the model (Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020). We present a detailed discussion of the related literature in Appendix B. In this paper, we define and study a relaxed, subproblem of MI: interpretive equivalence . Concretely, we seek to determine whether two models implement the same high-level algorithm, without requiring an explicit description of what that algorithm is. Understanding interpretive equivalence can bridge the gap between bottom-up and top-down approaches through reductions . Consider two examples: 

Example 1.1 (Reduction to Simpler Models) . MI is computationally prohibitive on larger mod-els (Adolfi et al., 2025). To mitigate this, if we could show that a small model is interpretively equivalent to a large one, then MI analyses on the small model could interpret the larger model. 

Example 1.2 (Reduction to Simpler Tasks) . MI’s scope is limited because interpreting models that solve complex tasks is at least as hard as manually designing an algorithm to solve them (Nanda et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2023). Interpretive equivalence provides a criterion to decompose complex tasks into simpler, interpretively equivalent ones. At the core of our approach (Figure 1), we propose the principle that two high-level algorithms (henceforth termed interpretations 3) are equivalent if their implementations are equivalent. Based on this principle, we design an algorithm to detect equivalence by measuring representation similarity. We prove that representation similarity is necessary and sufficient to characterize interpretive equivalence. Overall, our contributions span both theory and practice: 

• We propose an algorithm to compute interpretive equivalence between two models without 

interpreting them (Algorithm 1). 

• We demonstrate that Algorithm 1 is well-calibrated on a simple task where the ground truth is known. Then, we show its potential to find reductions (Examples 1.1 and 1.2).   

> 3We distinguish between an algorithm and an interpretation. Informally, an algorithm is independent of any computational abstraction. However, we show in Appendix E that this abstraction-free notion results in pathological equivalence definitions. Thus, we use the terminology interpretation to signify a dependence on a chosen level of computational abstraction.

2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

• We specialize the theory of causal abstraction to define interpretations, circuits, and representations (Sections 4 and 5). As byproducts of this formality, we obtain a measure of interpretation quality and an alternative characterization of interpretations as interventions (Section 5 and Appendix H). 

• We prove necessary and sufficient conditions for models’ interpretive equivalence based on their representation similarity. To our knowledge, these guarantees are the first to relate a model’s interpretations, circuits, and representations (Section 6). Throughout our paper, we use examples from language processing and Transformers. However, our framework does not depend on any properties of the input modality. 

# 2 Interpretive Equivalence Through Congruent Representations 

We define mechanistic interpretations A1, A2 as equivalent if they have equivalent implementa-tions. That is, any model which can be interpreted by A1 must also be interpreted by A2

and vice versa. We justify this principle later, but first we offer an algorithm to approximate this equivalence. This requires clarifying two procedures: (1) how do we enumerate all implemen-tations of A1, A2? (2) How do we measure the distance between these sets of implementations? 

Enumerating Implementations through Inter-ventions. We call any model h that has a mech-anistic interpretation A an implementation of A

(Definition 5.1). We take a bottom-up approach to generating implementations. Using causal in-terventions, we identify components in the model that are causally unrelated to the model’s behav-ior (Conmy et al., 2023; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2023) (i.e. they are not a part of the model’s circuit). A model’s mechanistic interpretations should be invariant to perturbation or ablation of these components. Dually, each time we perturb or ablate such a component, we yield a “new” model that is causally equivalent to the original one (and as a corollary, shares the same interpretation). In-tuitively, every implementation of A should be reachable through a causal intervention applied onto h. We take this dual perspective to gener-ating implementations by adding, removing, or modifying these unimportant components (Geiger et al., 2024; Gupta et al., 2024). This procedure is denoted as GetImpl (Algorithm 1; detailed in Appendix C).  

> 1

procedure Congruity (h1, h2, n) 

> 2

s ← 0 

> 3

for i ← 1 . . . n do  

> 4

h1, h⋆ 

> 1

← GetImpl (h1) 

> 5

h2, h⋆ 

> 2

← GetImpl (h2) 

> 6

s ← s + ReprDist (h1, h⋆

> 1

, h2) 

> 7

s ← s + ReprDist (h2, h⋆

> 2

, h1)

return 1 − | s/n − 1| 

> 8

procedure ReprDist (h1, h2, h3) 

> 9

for i ← 1, 2, 3 do  

> 10

Ri ← GetReprs (hi) 

> 11

if drepr (R1, R2) ≤ drepr (R1, R3) then  

> 12

return 1 

> 13

return 0Algorithm 1: Two models are congruent if representation similarity alone cannot differ-entiate them. drepr (R1, R2) measures repre-sentation similarity between representations of h1, h2. GetReprs , GetImpl retrieve the hidden representations of a given model and its implementations, respectively. 

Representation Similarity. We identify each implementation with their hidden representation spaces (GetReprs in Algorithm 1). Given two implementations, we measure their distance using linear representation similarity ( drepr defined in Definition G.1). Informally, linear representation similarity captures the extent to which the representations of one network can be linearly transformed to the other and vice versa. We notate this as ReprDist (Algorithm 1). Suppose that the implementation sets of A1, A2 were exactly equal. Let h1, h⋆ 

> 1

be implemen-tations sampled from A1 and h2 be an implementation sampled from A2.4 By symmetry, 

P[drepr (h1, h⋆

> 1

) < drepr (h2, h⋆

> 1

)] = P[drepr (h1, h⋆

> 1

) > drepr (h2, h⋆

> 1

)] . In this way, the implementations of 

A1, A2 are congruent with respect to drepr .Combining these concepts, we have our approximation of interpretive equivalence: Congruity .

# 3 Experiments 

Herein, we demonstrate three applications of Algorithm 1. First, on a toy task where ground-truth interpretations are known, we show that Congruity is well-calibrated (Section 3.1). Next, we apply our framework to pre-trained language models of various sizes (GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019) and   

> 4For the sake of argument, suppose i.i.d. sampling from a uniform distribution over A1,A2.

3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023)) and demonstrate that Congruity can distinguish between models that exhibit fine-grained algorithmic differences across various model scales (Section 3.2). Lastly, we show how Congruity can be used to relate a complex task like next-token prediction to a simpler one such as parts-of-speech identification (Section 3.3). 

3.1 Calibrating Congruity 

We consider the task of n-Permutation Detection : determining whether a given sequence of n

numbers is a permutation of the elements 1, . . . , n. For example, when n = 3, [3, 1, 2] → True 

and [1, 2, 2] → False . The task is sufficiently rich to support different interpretations, yet simple enough that solutions can be hard-coded as Transformers. We manually devise six different interpretations to solve this task whose procedures we detail in Appendix C. Roughly, their approaches can be organized into two buckets: 1. Sorting-Based (Interpretations 1–4). First sort the list of numbers by ascending (or descending) order, then directly check whether the resulting sequence is equal to 1, 2, . . . , n (or n, n − 1, . . . , 1).2. Counting-Based (Interpretations 5–6). Exploit the fact that the vocabulary contains exactly n

numbers and use the pigeonhole principle to detect duplicates in the given sequence. For all experiments, we fix n = 10 . Using the Restricted Access Sequence Processing Language (RASP), we hard-code six bidirectional Transformers (of various architectures) to implement each interpretation (Weiss et al., 2021). Then, for each hard-coded RASP Transformer, we leverage a technique of Gupta et al.’s (2024) to generate 100 model variants (with different architectures and weight configurations). These variants are constrained to maintain the same underlying interpretation as their hard-coded counterpart. So for each interpretation, we have 100 implementations. In total, we have 6 × 100 models that all achieve 96% + accuracy on 10 -permutation detection. We now directly compute Congruity (Algorithm 1) between pairs of models from our generated implementations. We perform hypothesis testing by bootstrapping a 95% confidence interval over the final output. 5 The results are shown in Figure 2 (Left) .Along the diagonals of Figure 2 (Left) , we see significantly high congruence. So when models share the same interpretation, representations across their implementations are approximately equivalent under linear transformation. On the other hand, off-diagonal entries admit low congruence. Thus, representation similarity across set of implementation as a whole can differentiate individual interpretations. These empirical findings complement our bounds in Main Results 1 and 2 because they suggest that Congruity is both necessary and sufficient to detect interpretive equivalence. Perhaps even more interesting, we observe a breaking row/column in Figure 2, where Interpretations 1–4 (the top-left 4 × 4 square) have an average within-group congruence of 0.43 . This is larger compared to the average across-group congruence (rows/columns 5-6) with Interpretations 5–6: 0.01 .These groupings correspond to our broad algorithmic buckets above and suggest that Congruity could also be adopted as a graded notion to characterize broad-stroke interpretive differences. 

3.2 Reduction to Simpler Models 

We now consider the task of indirect-object identification (IOI) (Wang et al., 2022): given a sentence like “ When John and Mary went to the store, John gave the drink to ” the model should complete the sentence with “ Mary. ” Because IOI can be solved algorithmically, it has been studied across many models: GPT2-small/medium and the Pythia class of models. While Merullo et al. (2024) find that GPT2-small and medium use the same circuit, Tigges et al. (2024) find that Pythia models across all scales use a consistent but different circuit from GPT2 models (Merullo et al. 2024, Appendix C; Tigges et al. 2024: Appendix D). We use these differences as a practical testbed for Congruity and explore how it generalizes across both model families and scales (85M to 2.9B parameters). 6         

> 5Here, H0:the two models do not share the same interpretation; and our alternate, H1:the two models share the same interpretations. We compute a Wald confidence interval with 20 bootstrap samples.
> 6Notably, Tigges et al. (2024) also find that circuits in larger models require more components , even when the underlying interpretation is constant. Thus, for Congruity to be effective in this setting, it also needs to move beyond identifying architectural similarities.

4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 2: (Left) Average congruity between models associated with different interpretations. ■

indicates models have different interpretations; whereas ■ indicates that models have statistically indistinguishable interpretations. (Center) Congruity between GPT2 and Pythia family of models on the IOI task. groups models based on their actual interpretive differences observed by Tigges et al. (2024); Merullo et al. (2024). (Right) Congruity between GPT2 on next-token prediction (for different token types: all tokens, articles, prepositions, punctuation, parentheses, and terminal punctuation) vs. GPT2 on in-context parts-of-speech identification. For each model, we generate 10 parallel implementations by intervening on the components found not 

to be in the IOI circuit (identified by both Tigges et al. 2024 and Merullo et al. 2024). Then, we apply 

Congruity , each time computing representation similarity with 200 IOI sentences. The results are shown in Figure 2 (Center) . We find that the Pythia models show high within-group congruence across different scales. GPT2 models exhibit similar behavior. This supports our intuition that interpretive equivalence could be leveraged to reduce the interpretations of complex models into interpretations of smaller ones (Example 1.1). For example, our results affirm that on the IOI task, Pythia-2.8b is interpretively equivalent to Pythia-160M; thus, a priori , it suffices to only interpret the latter. Indeed, Tigges et al. (2024) finds that both models share the same interpretation. On average, across-group congruence between Pythia and GPT2 is significantly lower (0.13 versus 0.73 and 0.92) which supports our previous insight that representation similarity provides increased identifiability over interpretations. It is unclear why Pythia-160M and 410M show increased congruence with GPT2-medium and small, respectively; perhaps, subtle similarities in name-mover heads representations could explain this (Tigges et al. 2024, Section 3.2). 

3.3 Reduction to Simpler Tasks 

Interpreting next-token prediction poses a challenge for both bottom-up and top-down MI approaches. For top-down approaches writing down a symbolic, end-to-end algorithm for next-token prediction is difficult. Bottom-up approaches face the opposite problem: circuit discovery may identify the entire model as important, failing to reduce the search space of interpretations. We show here that interpretive equivalence may offer some first-steps towards mechanistically understanding next-token prediction. Concretely, we identify sets of next-tokens for which GPT2’s next-token prediction process is interpretively similar to parts-of-speech identification (POS 7). POS is a largely syntactic task since it focuses solely on the grammatical role of words rather than their meaning in-context. Thus, we expect POS to be interpretively equivalent to the prediction of “syntactic tokens.” For computational ease, we conduct all experiments on GPT2. To discover the POS circuit in GPT2, we apply a method of Todd et al.’s (2024). We detail this process, along with the circuit we discover in Appendix C. We construct a dataset for next-token prediction by uniformly sampling 100 sentences from the C4 dataset (Raffel et al., 2020). We collate tokens from our next-token prediction sentences into disjoint groups of interest. For each group, we apply Congruity and compute representation similarity between our extracted POS circuit    

> 7Given tree:noun; run:verb; quick:adverb; fluffy: the model needs to output adjective .

5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 and the last-token hidden representations of the model. The results across different token groups are shown in Figure 2 (Right) .As a control, we first consider the group of all tokens. We observe a nonzero congruence of 0.48 with POS. Next, we consider token groups articles and prepositions . Prediction of these tokens typically appear mid-sentence and depend heavily on semantics. 8 Thus, we expect that predicting these tokens should yield no more interpretive equivalence to POS than the control. Indeed, we find POS’s congruity to articles and prepositions to be statistically indistinguishable from the all-token average. We now heuristically identify two sets of “syntactic tokens:” 1. Terminal Punctuation like “.”, “?”, or “!” mark the end of a sentence. Accurate prediction of these tokens intuitively requires syntactic identification of subject-verb-object relations and (in)dependent clauses. 2. Closing Brackets/Quotations like “)” can be implemented as skip-trigrams in one-layer attention Transformers (Elhage et al., 2021). So, we suspect that understanding sentence pragmatics is not needed for their prediction. We find that both groups yield significantly higher congruence compared our all-token control with medium effect size (measured through Cohen’s d). This stands in contrast to general punctuation and opening brackets/quotations. Although these other punctuation groups admit statistically significant congruence with POS, we observe a small effect size ( d < 0.3). We hypothesize that the placement of these tokens rely more on semantic processes. For example, commas may be placed for emphasis or to add dependent clauses rather than strictly maintain grammatical consistency. 

# 4 Representations, Circuits, Interpretations as Causal Models 

We now present our framework of interpretive equivalence. This theory grounds our algorithmic contributions in Section 2. Whenever possible, we present an informal treatment and defer the precise definitions to Appendix D, where we also have a full glossary and summary of notations. The next sections are organized as follows: 1. In Section 4, we define circuits , representations , and interpretations (Definitions 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4, respectively). 2. In Section 5, we define a criterion for when two interpretations are equivalent. We also introduce 

interpretive compression , a measure of interpretation abstraction. 3. In Section 6, we prove that representation similarity can describe interpretive equivalence (Main Results 1 and 2) and show that Congruity is closely related to these quantities (Main Result 3). Let Σ be an alphabet and Σ⋆ be all finite strings formed using Σ. We define a language model as a function h : Σ⋆ → R|Σ|. We often are interested in h’s behavior on a subset of inputs S ⊂ Σ⋆, rather than on all of Σ⋆. For this reason, we term S a task . While h alone serves as a sufficient functional description, interpretability requires understanding h’s underlying computational process. For this, we rely on three behavioral characterizations of a neural network at different levels of abstraction: h’s 

circuits , representations , and interpretation .

4.1 Circuits 

Definition 4.1 (Deterministic Causal Model, Geiger et al. 2025) . A (deterministic) causal model with 

m components is a quadruple (V,U, F, ≻) where V = ( v1, . . . , vm) is a set of hidden variables such that |V| = |F| = m, U is an input variable, and ≻ defines a partial ordering over V. For each vk ∈ V,

vk ≜ fk(Pa (vk),U) (4.1) where fk ∈ F and Pa (vk) ⊂ { v ∈ V : v ≻ vk} are the parents of vk.      

> 8Consider the fragment: “ [context] The students are looking [mask] ” the next prepositions—“at”, “into”, or “for”—are all syntactically sound, but they are semantically ambiguous without further context. Articles are similar: consider, “I need to buy [mask] car.” [mask] could be either the indefinite (“a”) or definite (“the”), both are syntactically valid but the choice requires pragmatic reasoning.

6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 A deterministic causal model describes a computational graph where hidden variables V (nodes) store latent computation results computed by the functions in F (edges). Since a computation graph is acyclic, the data/compute flow determined by F induces a partial ordering over V, ≻.For a specific input setting U ← u, we denote by VF(u) to be the unique solution : a configuration of the values V consistent with both u and F (Peters et al., 2017). Likewise, vF 

> i

(u) is the solution of 

vi ∈ V to U ← u. In this way, vF 

> i

is a function that maps from S → Rni .

There is a natural tradeoff between the collective complexity of V and the complexity of any individual operator in F. On one extreme, any blackbox model h can be expressed as a trivial causal model with one hidden variable: v1 ≜ h(U). On the other, each v ∈ V could be a single neuron (thus |V| ∼ 10 9), while elements in F consist of primitive operations like dot-products. In this way, V determines the level of abstraction of the causal model. We now use this formalism to define circuits. 

Circuits form the starting point for almost all bottom-up approaches in MI (Wang et al., 2022; Conmy et al., 2023; Lieberum et al., 2023, inter alia ). Intuitively, for some task S, a circuit describes the (minimal) computational pathways used by the model to produce h(S). Throughout our treatment, we do not require minimality as finding minimal circuits has been shown to be an intractable combinatorial optimization problem (Adolfi et al., 2025). 

Definition 4.2 (Circuit) . An m-circuit of h on S is a causal graph (V,U, F, ≻) with m components that satisfies: (1) U is S-valued; (2) Hidden variables are real-valued; (3) There exists a path from U

to a variable vout ∈ V such that vF

> out

(S) = h(S).For any h and m ∈ Z+, an m-circuit of h exists by its trivial causal model. Since we do not require minimality, m-circuits are not unique: a joint change of bases to any vk ∈ V \ vout and fk; or, adding a new variable that does not contribute to vout results in a new causal model that preserves faithfulness to h. We further explore some of these properties in Section 5. 

4.2 Representations 

Representations of a neural network are a sequence of activation spaces. Increasingly, representations have been understood to encode concepts which deep networks then iteratively refine (Jastrzebski et al., 2018). We formally view representations as abstractions of circuits and define them through 

causal abstraction (Beckers and Halpern, 2019; Geiger et al., 2025). A causal model K⋆ abstracts 

K if there exists a surjective map from K’s variables to K⋆’s variables that preserves K’s causal relationships. Any map that admits this abstraction is an alignment from K to K⋆ (Definition D.3). Essentially, an alignment π maps K’s “low-level” variables to K⋆’s “high-level” variables (Rubenstein et al., 2017). Like m-circuits, for a given low-level and high-level causal model pair, the set of alignment maps that exist between them are not unique. 

Definition 4.3 (Representations) . Let K be an m-circuit of h on a task S. An L-circuit that abstracts K

is an (L, δ )-representation of K if for each vk ∈ V,

• Pa (vk+1) = {vk}, Pa (v1) = {U}, and vL = vout .

• For each 1 ≤ k ≤ L, there exists linear maps Ak : Rnk → R|Σ|, Bk : R|Σ| → Rnk where 

∥Ak∥op , ∥Bk∥op ≤ 1,

∥AkvF 

> k

− h∥ < δ and ∥Bkh − vF 

> k

∥ < δ (4.2) for some norm (to be specified). Representations have two crucial properties: they compress the complex causal model of K into a single chain of length L; and, they have high signal and low noise. By Equation (4.2) , each layer’s hidden representation can identify K’s output behavior (independent of its children). Yet, the representations at each layer are simple enough that outputs of h can identify their value (independent of its ancestors). In MI, this latter constraint is often used as a search criterion to localize a network’s circuit (Belrose et al., 2025). For h, its set possible of circuits explode combinatorially with depth, whereas the set of possible representations only scale quadratically. Therefore, compression through abstract representation gives us a tractable staging ground to compare circuits. 7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

4.3 Interpretations 

Interpretations are symbolic, human-understandable descriptions of h that faithfully captures its functional behavior on a task. We formalize them as abstractions. 

Definition 4.4. Fix a task S. A causal model A ≜ (V⋆,U, F⋆, ≻) that abstracts a circuit K ≜ (V,U, F, ≻)

is an η-faithful interpretation if A’s output approximates K’s with error at most η across inputs in S.Notably, our construction does not assume there is a distance metric over A’s variables nor do we specify the values of these variables. This generality aligns our framework with most MI literature where V⋆ could take on symbolic values (Hanna et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2023, inter alia ). For any circuit K, an interpretation always exists through the trivial interpretation : K itself is an interpretation of K (with the identity abstraction; albeit, this is not very useful). Since interpretations depend on a fixed level of abstraction ( V⋆), they must not be unique: by varying V⋆ and π we can produce different interpretations. 9 As a corollary, circuits are not identifiable by their interpretations. This seems problematic, but in Appendix E we demonstrate that abstraction-dependent interpretations are necessary for a non-trivial notion of interpretive equivalence. 

# 5 Interpretive Equivalence through Implementation Equivalence 

Méloux et al. (2025) shows that there exists a many-to-many relationship between circuits and interpretations. This implies that comparing individual circuits and interpretations is ill-defined. Thus, we propose that two interpretations are (approximately) equivalent if and only if their implementations are (approximately) equivalent. By examining families of circuits instead of individual ones, we can effectively quotient out the many-to-one mapping from circuits to interpretations. To start, we define implementations . Let K ≜ (V,U, F, ≻) be an m-circuit of h on some task S. Let 

A ≜ (V⋆,U, F⋆, ≻) be an η-faithful interpretation of K through an alignment π : SubsetsOf (V) → V⋆

(see Definition D.3). Notice that for fixed A, π, by carefully varying F we could construct many different circuits (and computation graphs) over (V,U) that all abstract to the same interpretation A

under π. Concretely, in our framework, V,U defines a neural architecture and F corresponds to many weight configurations that result in the same interpretation A under π. We then define A’s implementations as the set of all admissible F under A, π. This construction mirrors observations that implementations are diffuse and plentiful in the weight space (Lubana et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2023; Gupta et al., 2024). Precisely, 

Definition 5.1 (Implementation) . Let Π be a class of alignments. F is an implementation of A if there exists π ∈ Π such that A is an η-faithful interpretation of (V,U, F, ≺F ) under π.

Figure 3 By a slight abuse of notation, we denote Π−1(A) as the set of all implementations of A under alignments Π. Then, a non-empty intersection between Π−11 and Π−12 directly corresponds to Méloux et al.’s (2025) non-identifiability result. We assume that any circuit comes with a metric attached to its variables, i.e. d : V × V → R≥0. This is reasonable, as a circuit’s variables are real-valued (Defini-tion 4.2). d naturally induces a pseudometric over Π−1(A),where for F, ˜F ∈ Π−1(A)

d(F, ˜F) ≜ d(VF , V ˜F ) = d(VF (S), V ˜F (S)) . (5.1) Given two sets of implementations over (V,U, ·, ·) we can leverage d to quantify (1) the Hausdorff distance between them; and, (2) their diameters. We call the former interpretive equivalence and the latter interpretive compression (see Figure 3). More precisely, 

Definition 5.2. For i ∈ { 1, 2}, let Ai ≜ (V⋆ 

> i

,U, ·, ·) be a ηi-faithful interpretation of K ≜ (V,U, ·, ·)

and Πi be a class of alignments that map from SubsetsOf (V) → V⋆ 

> i

. Then, A1, A2 are ε-approximate interpretively equivalent if 

dinterp (A1, A2) ≜ dH

 Π−11 (A1), Π−12 (A2) < ε, (5.2) 

> 9To see more details of this construction, refer to Definition D.3 and Equation (D.2)

8Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 where dH is the Hausdorff distance 10 defined by d (see Equation (5.1)). 

Definition 5.3. Let A be an η-faithful interpretation of K and Π be a class of alignments. Then, the 

interpretive compression of A is 

κ(A, K, Π) ≜ diameter (Π−1(A)) = sup 

> F,F′∈Π−1(A)

d(F, F′). (5.3) Interpretive equivalence and compression are tightly coupled. To explore their relationship, let us consider two extremes. On one hand, suppose A = K and |Π| = 1. Then, there exists exactly one implementation of A under Π: K. This implies that there is no interpretive compression. Further, any interpretation equivalent to A must admit the same exact same weight configuration as K. This effectively creates a bijective mapping between model weights and interpretations. On the other hand, suppose that A is the trivial causal model of h, and let Π be all alignments. Since A conveys no information about the computational process of K and Π places no constraint on alignment, any circuit by Definition 4.2 must be an implementation of A. In fact, Sutter et al. (2025) show under mild assumptions that this phenomenon persists as long as Π is the set of all alignments. And so, in this case, interpretive compression is maximal. These examples illustrate a duality between equivalence and compression: while more compression shrinks and simplifies the set of possible interpretations, it simultaneously enlarges the set of implementations and complicates interpretive equivalence. Interpretive equivalence, in Definition 5.2, requires that both interpretations originate from the same circuit K. This constraint can be relaxed by augmenting Πi such that (π : SubsetsOf (V1) → V⋆ 

> i

) ∈ Πi.Through Π−1 

> i

, we only consider implementations of A1, A2 on the same neural architecture V1. This creates asymmetry in choosing which circuit to use for comparison ( V1 or V2). Our intuition is that we should select the circuit of least compression that admits at least one implementation for both interpretations. 11 Our bounds in Section 6 justify this principle. We describe critical properties of interpretive equivalence and compression in Appendix F. 

# 6 Representational Similarity and Interpretive Equivalence 

Using interpretive compression and representation similarity, we now prove both upper and lower bounds on interpretive equivalence (Main Result 1 and Main Result 2, respectively). The proofs and formalisms are deferred to Appendix G. Throughout this section, we consider the most general setup: for i ∈ { 1, 2}, let Ki be a circuit of a model hi over a shared task S. Assume each circuit admits an 

(Li, δi)-representation Ri through an alignment map ρi. First, we define a notion of distance between these two representations. 

Definition 6.1 (Representation Similarity) . Let Hi be the concatenation of all hidden variables in Ri.Then, the representation similarity of R1, R2, drepr (R1, R2), is the bidirectional linear approximation error between H1, H2 (formally, Definition G.1). Defining similarity with a strict linear approximation is not necessary to develop our theory, but offers attractive computational tradeoffs. This is because we can formulate representation similarity as multi-target linear regression for which there are sharp approximations with small sample complexity. Alternatively, drepr could be defined with an arbitrary kernel (Kornblith et al., 2019). We also make the following assumptions: (1) ρi is Lipschitz continuous with Lipschitz constant Lip (ρi). (2) There exists ∆ > 0 such that ∥h1 − h2∥ < ∆ over S. (3) The implementation distance d (see Equation (5.1) )is induced by a fixed distillation function Φ: for implementations F, ˜F over the same variables V,

d(F, ˜F) ≜ ∥ΦVF − ΦV ˜F ∥. (4) There is a 1-Lipschitz map Ψ such that ∥ΨH1 − ΨH2∥ ≤ drepr (R1, R2)

and ∥ΦVF − ΨH∥ < ω.Assumption 1 stabilizes representations such that a small change in circuitry implies a proportional representation perturbation. In practice, this is reasonable since representations are usually distilled from neural networks via linear projection or by averaging the activations of several neural compo-nents (Sucholutsky et al., 2023). Assumption 2 guarantees that functional differences between our                              

> 10 The Hausdorff distance between two sets A,Bis the greatest distance a point from A,Bneeds to travel to reach B,A, respectively: ˜d(a,B)≜inf b∈Bd(a,b),dH(A,B)≜max (sup a∈A˜d(a,B),sup b∈B˜d(b,A)) .
> 11 Attached to each V1,V2are distance metrics d1,d2. Alternatively, one could also choose the circuit where
> diis most convenient to compute.

9Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 target models are bounded, otherwise their interpretive inequivalence is trivial. Assumptions 3-4 state that our implementation metric d only measures distance using a set of observable components. Further, these components are recoverable from representations (up to ω). In this way, representations can serve as a surrogate for distances between circuits. For i ∈ { 1, 2}, suppose that Ai is an ηi-faithful interpretation of Ki. We first show that representation similarity between K1, K2 upperbounds interpretive equivalence. 

Main Result 1. Let Π and Π⋆ be alignment classes that map K1’s variables into A1, A2’s variables, respectively. Suppose there exists F⋆ ∈ Π−1 

> ⋆

(A2) such that its representation under ρ1 is an (L1, δ1)-representation. Then, the approximate interpretive equivalence of A1, A2 under alignments Π−1, Π−1

> ⋆

is 

dinterp (A1, A2) ≤ κ(A1, K1, Π) + κ(A2, K1, Π⋆)

| {z }

> (a)

+ 2ω + drepr (R1, R2) + δ1 + δ2 + ∆

| {z }

> (b)

. (6.1) Equation (6.1) explicits two dependencies: (a) measures interpretive compression of A1, A2 on K1.When compression is low, circuits retain more information about interpretive differences. And since representations distill circuits, it is intuitive that representation similarity dominates the upperbound in this regime. In contrast, when compression is high, our examples in Section 5 illustrate that when circuits become uninformative, so should representations and their similarities; (b) jointly measures the quality of representations R1, R2 and their differences. If δ1, δ2 ≫ 1, representations lose meaningful linear structure even though they sufficiently abstract implementations of A1, A2. This bound exposes a tension between the geometric richness of representations and our computational approach to their similarities. For example, representations lying on complex manifolds may not be well-described by our linear formulation of representation similarity (Ansuini et al., 2019; Pimentel et al., 2020). Thus, we hypothesize representations and their similarity criterion need to be simultaneously broadened to achieve more generality. We leave the implications of this for future work. Now, the lowerbound: 

Main Result 2. Let Π and Π⋆ be an alignment that map K1’s variables onto A1, A2’s variables. Suppose A1, A2 are ε-approximate interpretively equivalent under the alignment classes Π⋆, Π. Then, 

ε ≥ drepr (R1, R2) − (δ1 + δ2 + ∆)

Lip (ρ1) + 1 . (6.2) The terms in Equation (6.2) mirror the dynamics of Equation (6.1) . If the implementation sets are ε-close, then there cannot be too much discrepancy between the observed representations (see the numerator), unless it can be explained away by the slack terms (δ1 + δ2 + ∆). Along these lines, Lip (ρ1) (in the denominator) captures the intuition that when the mapping from circuits to representations is unstable, small implementation-level gaps can lead to larger representational differences. Beyond interpretive equivalence, Main Result 2 has implications for steering (Singh et al., 2024). When the identifiability of representations is low ( Lip (ρ1) ≫ 1 and drepr (R1, R2) ≪ 1), steering interventions are less likely to induce interpretive change, i.e. significant alterations to the representation space may see little change in model interpretation. In Main Result 3, we show how this directly relates to Congruity . For i ∈ { 1, 2}, let us assume an arbitrary distribution over Π−1

> i

and denote P ≜ P1 ⊗ P1 ⊗ P2 ⊗ P2 the product distribution. 

Main Result 3. Let p be the expected value of ReprDist in Algorithm 1, F1, F2 iid 

∼ Π−11 (A1), and 

F3 ∼ Π−12 (A2) then 

p ≥ 1 − inf  

> ε>0

P[drepr (F1, F2) > κ(A1, K1, Π1) + ε] − P[drepr (F1, F3) < dinterp (A1, A2) − ε]. (6.3) This lowerbound demonstrates that ReprDist (and as a corollary, Congruity ; see Corollary H.1) accounts for interpretive compression and equivalence. Concretely, it predicts that, in expectation, 

ReprDist will be large when Π−11̸ = Π−12 except in two cases: (a) within-interpretation dispersion is high: the representations of two implementations of A1 can differ more than their interpretive compression; or (b) cross-interpretation collision: an implementation of A2 lies close in representation to A1 despite dinterp (A1, A2) ≫ 1. We discuss these results further in Appendix H and also analyze the sample complexity of Congruity .10 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we define and study the problem of interpretive equivalence: detecting whether two models share the same mechanistic interpretation without interpreting them. We contribute an algorithm to estimate equivalence and demonstrate its use on toy and pre-trained language models. Then, we provide a theoretical foundation to ground and explain our algorithm. Our framework and results lay a foundation for the development of more rigorous evaluation methods in MI and automated, generalizable interpretation discovery methods. 

# Acknowledgements 

Alan is supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE2140739. Alan thanks Bü s, ra Asan and Andrew Koulogeorge for helpful feedback and discussion of early drafts of the work. 

# References 

Federico Adolfi, Martina G. Vilas, and Todd Wareham. 2025. The computational complexity of circuit discovery for inner interpretability. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations . 2, 7, 17 Alessio Ansuini, Alessandro Laio, Jakob H Macke, and Davide Zoccolan. 2019. Intrinsic dimension of data representations in deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc. 10 Andy Arditi, Oscar Obeso, Aaquib Syed, Daniel Paleka, Nina Panickssery, Wes Gurnee, and Neel Nanda. 2024. Refusal in language models is mediated by a single direction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 136037–136083. Curran Associates, Inc. 1, 17 Sander Beckers, Frederick Eberhardt, and Joseph Y. Halpern. 2020. Approximate causal abstractions. In 

Proceedings of The 35th Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence Conference , volume 115 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 606–615. PMLR. 17 Sander Beckers and Joseph Y Halpern. 2019. Abstracting causal models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 2678–2685. Issue: 01. 7, 17, 23 Nora Belrose, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Halawi, Stella Biderman, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2025. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned lens. Preprint ,arXiv:2303.08112. 7 Leonard Bereska and Stratis Gavves. 2024. Mechanistic interpretability for AI safety - A Review. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Survey Certification, Expert Certification. 1, 17 Adithya Bhaskar, Alexander Wettig, Dan Friedman, and Danqi Chen. 2024. Finding transformer circuits with edge pruning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 2, 17 Stella Biderman, Usvsn Prashanth, Lintang Sutawika, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Shivanshu Purohit, and Edward Raff. 2023. Emergent and predictable memorization in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36. 4 Lawrence Chan, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Nicholas Goldwosky-Dill, Ryan Greenblatt, Jenny Nitishinskaya, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Buck Shlegeris, and Nate Thomas. 2022. Causal scrubbing, a method for rigorously testing interpretability hypotheses. AI Alignment Forum . 17 Robin Chan, Reda Boumasmoud, Anej Svete, Yuxin Ren, Qipeng Guo, Zhijing Jin, Shauli Ravfogel, Mrinmaya Sachan, Bernhard Schölkopf, Mennatallah El-Assady, and Ryan Cotterell. 2024. On affine homotopy between language encoders. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 27 Arthur Conmy, Augustine Parker-Mavor N., Aengus Lynch, Stefan Heimersheim, and Adria Alonso-Garriga. 2023. Towards Automated Circuit Discovery for Mechanistic Interpretability. In Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 3, 7, 15, 17, 18 Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, and others. 2022. Toy models of superposition. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652 . 19 

11 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, DasSarma, Nova, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. 2021. A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits. 1, 6, 17 Dan Friedman, Alexander Wettig, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Learning Transformer Programs. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 18, 19, 20 Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Maheep Chaudhary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christopher Potts, and Thomas Icard. 2025. Causal abstraction: A theoretical foundation for mechanistic interpretability. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(83):1–64. 1, 6, 7, 22, 24, 25 Atticus Geiger, Hanson Lu, Thomas F Icard, and Christopher Potts. 2021. Causal abstractions of neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 23 Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah Goodman. 2024. Finding alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , volume 236 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 160–187. PMLR. 1, 3, 16, 17, 18, 20, 23 Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer Levy. 2021. Transformer Feed-Forward Layers Are Key-Value Memories. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5484–5495, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. 1 Angeliki Giannou, Shashank Rajput, Jy-Yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D. Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. 2023. Looped Transformers as Programmable Computers. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 11398–11442. PMLR. 18 Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Chris MacLeod, Lucas Sato, and Aryaman Arora. 2023. Localizing model behavior with path patching. Preprint , arXiv:2304.05969. 3 Rohan Gupta, Iván Arcuschin, Thomas Kwa, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso. 2024. Interpbench: Semi-synthetic transformers for evaluating mechanistic interpretability techniques. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track . 3, 4, 8, 16, 18, 19, 20 Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. 2023. How does GPT-2 compute greater-than?: Interpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 8, 17 Michael Hanna, Sandro Pezzelle, and Yonatan Belinkov. 2024. Have Faith in Faithfulness: Going Beyond Circuit Overlap When Finding Model Mechanisms. In First Conference on Language Modeling . 17, 18 Stefan Heimersheim and Neel Nanda. 2024. How to use and interpret activation patching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15255 . 23 Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Towards faithfully interpretable NLP systems: How should we define and evaluate faithfulness? In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4198–4205, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. 2 Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. 2017. Categorical Reparameterization with Gumbel-Softmax. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations . 19 Stanisław Jastrzebski, Devansh Arpit, Nicolas Ballas, Vikas Verma, Tong Che, and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Residual connections encourage iterative inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations .7Max Klabunde, Tobias Schumacher, Markus Strohmaier, and Florian Lemmerich. 2025. Similarity of neural network models: A survey of functional and representational measures. ACM Comput. Surv. , 57(9). 18 Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2019. Similarity of Neural Network Representations Revisited. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3519–3529. PMLR. 9, 18, 27 

12 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Andrew Koulogeorge, Sean Xie, Saeed Hassanpour, and Soroush Vosoughi. 2025. Bridging the faithfulness gap in prototypical models. In The Sixth Workshop on Insights from Negative Results in NLP , pages 86–99, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. 1 Andrew Lee, Xiaoyan Bai, Itamar Pres, Martin Wattenberg, Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, and Rada Mihalcea. 2024. A Mechanistic Understanding of Alignment Algorithms: A Case Study on DPO and Toxicity. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning . 17 Tom Lieberum, Matthew Rahtz, János Kramár, Neel Nanda, Geoffrey Irving, Rohin Shah, and Vladimir Mikulik. 2023. Does Circuit Analysis Interpretability Scale? Evidence from Multiple Choice Capabilities in Chinchilla. 7David Lindner, Janos Kramar, Sebastian Farquhar, Matthew Rahtz, Thomas McGrath, and Vladimir Mikulik. 2023. Tracr: Compiled Transformers as a Laboratory for Interpretability. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 19 Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Eric J Bigelow, Robert P. Dick, David Krueger, and Hidenori Tanaka. 2023. Mechanistic Mode Connectivity. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 22965–23004. PMLR. 8, 16 Riccardo Massidda, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, and Davide Bacciu. 2023. Causal Abstraction with Soft Interventions. In Proceedings of the Second Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , volume 213 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 68–87. PMLR. 17, 19 Maxime Méloux, Silviu Maniu, François Portet, and Maxime Peyrard. 2025. Everything, everywhere, all at once: Is mechanistic interpretability identifiable? In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations . 2, 8, 17 Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex J. Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. 2022. Locating and Editing Factual Associations in GPT. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 1 William Merrill, Ashish Sabharwal, and Noah A. Smith. 2022. Saturated Transformers are Constant-Depth Threshold Circuits. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:843–856. _eprint: https://direct.mit.edu/tacl/article-pdf/doi/10.1162/tacl_a_00493/2038506/tacl_a_00493.pdf. 18 Jack Merullo, Carsten Eickhoff, and Ellie Pavlick. 2024. Circuit component reuse across tasks in transformer language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations . 4, 5, 17 Lukas Muttenthaler, Lorenz Linhardt, Jonas Dippel, Robert A Vandermeulen, Katherine Hermann, Andrew Lampinen, and Simon Kornblith. 2023. Improving neural network representations using human similarity judgments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 50978–51007. Curran Associates, Inc. 18 Neel Nanda. 2023. Attribution patching: Activation patching at industrial scale. URL: https://www. neelnanda. io/mechanistic-interpretability/attribution-patching . 15, 17 Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2022. Progress measures for grokking via mechanistic interpretability. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations . 2, 17 Yaniv Nikankin, Anja Reusch, Aaron Mueller, and Yonatan Belinkov. 2025. Arithmetic without algorithms: Language models solve math with a bag of heuristics. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations . 17 Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter. 2020a. An overview of early vision in inceptionv1. Distill . Https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/early-vision. 1, 17 Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter. 2020b. Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill . Https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in. 16 Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. 2022. In-context learning and induction heads. Transformer Circuits Thread . Https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html. 17 

13 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Jun Otsuka and Hayato Saigo. 2022. On the Equivalence of Causal Models: A Category-Theoretic Approach. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , volume 177 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 634–646. PMLR. 17, 19 Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. 2024. The Linear Representation Hypothesis and the Geometry of Large Language Models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning . 16, 23 Judea Pearl. 2009. Causality . Cambridge university press. 17 Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Scholkopf. 2017. Elements of Causal Inference: Foundations and Learning Algorithms . MIT Press. 7, 17 Tiago Pimentel, Josef Valvoda, Rowan Hall Maudslay, Ran Zmigrod, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell. 2020. Information-theoretic probing for linguistic structure. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4609–4622, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. 10 Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9. 3 Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(140):1–67. 5 Shauli Ravfogel, Anej Svete, Vésteinn Snæbjarnarson, and Ryan Cotterell. 2025. Gumbel counterfactual generation from language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .22 Paul K. Rubenstein, Sebastian Weichwald, Stephan Bongers, Joris M. Mooij, Dominik Janzing, Moritz Grosse-Wentrup, and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2017. Causal consistency of structural equation models. Preprint ,arXiv:1707.00819. 7 Claudia Shi, Nicolas Beltran-Velez, Achille Nazaret, Carolina Zheng, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Andrew Jesson, Maggie Makar, and David Blei. 2024. Hypothesis testing the circuit hypothesis in LLMs. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 17 Ravid Shwartz Ziv and Yann LeCun. 2024. To Compress or Not to Compress—Self-Supervised Learning and Information Theory: A Review. Entropy , 26(3). 18 Shashwat Singh, Shauli Ravfogel, Jonathan Herzig, Roee Aharoni, Ryan Cotterell, and Ponnurangam Kumaraguru. 2024. Representation surgery: Theory and practice of affine steering. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning . 10 Oscar Skean, Md Rifat Arefin, Dan Zhao, Niket Patel, Jalal Naghiyev, Yann LeCun, and Ravid Shwartz-Ziv. 2025. Layer by layer: Uncovering hidden representations in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02013 . 18 Ilia Sucholutsky, Lukas Muttenthaler, Adrian Weller, Andi Peng, Andreea Bobu, Been Kim, Bradley C Love, Erin Grant, Iris Groen, Jascha Achterberg, et al. 2023. Getting aligned on representational alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13018 . 9, 18 Jiuding Sun, Jing Huang, Sidharth Baskaran, Karel D’Oosterlinck, Christopher Potts, Michael Sklar, and Atticus Geiger. 2025. HyperDAS: Towards Automating Mechanistic Interpretability with Hypernetworks. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations . 1, 17, 20 Denis Sutter, Julian Minder, Thomas Hofmann, and Tiago Pimentel. 2025. The non-linear representation dilemma: Is causal abstraction enough for mechanistic interpretability? Preprint , arXiv:2507.08802. 9 Aaquib Syed, Can Rager, and Arthur Conmy. 2023. Attribution patching outperforms automated circuit discovery. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10348 . 17 Hannes Thurnherr and Jérémy Scheurer. 2024. Tracrbench: Generating interpretability testbeds with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.13714 . 19 Curt Tigges, Michael Hanna, Qinan Yu, and Stella Biderman. 2024. LLM Circuit Analyses Are Consistent Across Training and Scale. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .4, 5, 20 Naftali Tishby, Fernando C. Pereira, and William Bialek. 2000. The information bottleneck method. _eprint: physics/0004057. 18 

14 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Eric Todd, Millicent Li, Arnab Sen Sharma, Aaron Mueller, Byron C Wallace, and David Bau. 2024. Function vectors in large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations . 5, 21 Mariya Toneva and Leila Wehbe. 2019. Interpreting and improving natural-language processing (in machines) with natural language-processing (in the brain). In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc. 18 Eduard Tulchinskii, Kristian Kuznetsov, Laida Kushnareva, Daniil Cherniavskii, Sergey Nikolenko, Evgeny Burnaev, Serguei Barannikov, and Irina Piontkovskaya. 2023. Intrinsic Dimension Estimation for Robust Detection of AI-Generated Texts. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 39257–39276. Curran Associates, Inc. 18 Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron Singer, and Stuart Shieber. 2020. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation analysis. In Advances in neural information processing systems , volume 33, pages 12388–12401. 23 Martina G. Vilas, Federico Adolfi, David Poeppel, and Gemma Roig. 2024. Position: An inner interpretability framework for AI inspired by lessons from cognitive neuroscience. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 49506–49522. PMLR. 1, 17 Kevin Ro Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2022. Interpretabil-ity in the Wild: a Circuit for Indirect Object Identification in GPT-2 Small. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations . 1, 4, 7, 17, 20, 23 Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. 2020. Understanding contrastive representation learning through alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 9929–9939. PMLR. 18 Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. 2021. Thinking Like Transformers. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 11080–11090. PMLR. 4, 18 Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, Christopher Potts, and Noah Goodman. 2023. Interpretability at Scale: Identifying Causal Mechanisms in Alpaca. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pages 78205–78226. Curran Associates, Inc. 1, 17 Aolin Xu and Maxim Raginsky. 2017. Information-theoretic analysis of generalization capability of learning algorithms. In Advances in neural information processing systems , volume 30. 18 Fabio Massimo Zennaro. 2022. Abstraction between structural causal models: A review of definitions and properties. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08603 . 19 Zhiqian Zhong, Ziming Liu, Max Tegmark, and Jacob Andreas. 2023. The Clock and the Pizza: Two Stories in Mechanistic Explanation of Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 2, 8, 17 

# A Questions and Clarifications 

It seems that a prerequisite of Congruity is circuit discovery. Given that circuit discovery is 

NP-Hard , how can this algorithm be efficient? 

A: A circuit is a minimal subset of the computation graph that explains the model’s functional behavior. Notably, this minimality requirement is what makes circuit discovery hard. In Congruity ,we do not require a circuit in a strict sense. Instead, the practitioner needs to identify individual 

components that are unimportant , i.e. removing it does not affect functional behavior. This is more relaxed than performing circuit discovery and applying the complement. For a model with 

m components, existing component scoring methods such as activation/attribution patching can effectively identify unimportant component sets in O(1) time (Conmy et al., 2023; Nanda, 2023). 

In Section 5, it is argued that there could be many interpretations for a given circuit. How do we know which (or at what level) interpretations are being compared through Congruity , if we do not interpret the models first? 

15 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

A: The level at which interpretations are being compared in Congruity depends wholly on the interventions being performed in GetImpl . Given an interpretation A of some circuit K, consider the set of A’s implementations under some arbitrary alignment class Π. We could try and enumerate the set Π−1(A) naively. In most cases, this is extremely difficult because Π−1(A) could have complex geometry in the weight space (Lubana et al., 2023). We could identify this set by dually enumerating interventions. Concretely, fix some F ∈ Π−1(A). Construct a set of interventions Γ such that for each 

˜F ∈ Π−1(A), there is γ ∈ Γ where γ(F) = ˜F. In many cases, Γ is more intuitive than Π−1(A) (Geiger et al., 2024; Park et al., 2024; Gupta et al., 2024). Alternatively, we could directly define Π−1(A) with 

Γ. This strategy is employed in GetImpl to implicitly define the set of interpretations being compared. To our knowledge, there is surprisingly little literature on the nature of these interventions and we believe that our insights in Sections 2 and 5 suggest this may be a fruitful direction for future work. 

The tasks presented in Section 3 are quite simple. Would linear representation alignment as a similarity metric between representations in Congruity still be effective for more complex tasks? 

A: We choose linear representation alignment because of the linear representation hypothesis (Park et al., 2024). However, this does not restrict the generality of our framework. This is because the choice of alignment map from circuits to representations, ρ, is unrestricted. One could indirectly construct more complex drepr by indirectly increasing the complexity of ρ. In this case, ρ can be thought of as a constant feature map of arbitrary complexity. 

How does the proposed framework allow practitioners to translate interpretive equivalence into actual interpretations? 

A: Interpretive equivalence alone is not sufficient to identify interpretations. We leave the formal exploration of this for future work. But, as discussed in Examples 1.1 and 1.2, interpretive equivalence potentially simplifies the interpretation workflow. 

How would the theoretical framework in Sections 4 and 5 generalize to different notions of causal abstraction? 

A: The difference between various causal abstraction frameworks is their definition of an alignment map π (see Definition D.3). For example, bijective translations (in contrast to constructive abstractions , the notion of abstraction we use throughout the main text) require that the alignment map be bijective. Our framework can easily accommodate these different notions by simply tightening or loosening the set of permissible alignments Π. Further, assuming all else equal, as Π increases or decreases in size, interpretive compression necessarily increases and decreases, respectively. In this way, the tightness of Main Results 1 and 2 adjusts to the chosen notion of causal abstraction. On the other hand, Main Results 1 and 2 do not rely on structural properties of Π. Potential future work could significantly tighten these bounds by considering sharp restrictions over the allowed alignments. 

Why is it that in Main Results 1 and 2, there is no dependence on the ηi-faithfulness of the interpretations that we are comparing? 

A: Faithfulness is implicitly encoded into interpretive compression which appears in both Main Results 1 and 2. Let A be an η-faithful interpretation of K. Fix some alignment class π and consider 

Π−1(A). As η → ∞, the size of Π−1(A) grows monotonically. To see this, let ε > 0 be arbitrary. If A

is an η-interpretation of K, then A must also be an (η + ε)-interpretation of K. In other words, if the faithfulness constraint is relaxed, then A could be a faithful interpretation for any circuit. This implies that any notion of interpretive equivalence must be trivial since every interpretation corresponds to every circuit. 

# B Related Literature 

There has been extensive study in interpreting neural networks (specifically, language models). With respect to our paper, they can be organized into the following three buckets. 

Mechanistic Interpretability. Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) can be broadly broken into two distinct phases: first, identifying a minimal subset of the model’s computational graph that is responsible for a specific behavior—this process is also referred to as circuit discovery (Olah et al., 16 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 2020b;a; Conmy et al., 2023; Bhaskar et al., 2024; Hanna et al., 2024); second, assigning human-interpretable explanations to each of the extracted components—this process is generally referred to as mechanistic interpretability (Chan et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2023; Merullo et al., 2024). This paper focuses on the latter process; thus, when we invoke the term mechanistic interpretability, we are referring specifically to this second phase. For completeness, we briefly review circuit discovery as well. A model can be seen as a computational graph (Elhage et al., 2021; Olsson et al., 2022): G = ( V, E)

with vertices V and edges E ⊂ V × V . A circuit is then any binary function f : E → { 0, 1}. The optimal circuit f satisfies two properties: (1) it minimizes ∑e∈E f (e); and (2) when edges not in the circuit e ∈ E, f (e) = 0 are ablated, the model’s functional behavior remains unchanged. Although circuit discovery can be concretely formulated as an optimization problem, it is computationally intractable in its naive form (Bhaskar et al., 2024; Adolfi et al., 2025). As a result, many relaxations and heuristics have been developed (Conmy et al., 2023; Syed et al., 2023; Nanda, 2023; Hanna et al., 2024; Bhaskar et al., 2024). Nevertheless, there exists a solution set that can be statistically verified (Shi et al., 2024). The process of mechanistic interpretability, which we focus on in this paper, presents different challenges. MI involves iteratively generating hypotheses about the interpretations for the interactions between different components, then testing those hypotheses through carefully crafted interventions (Chan et al., 2022; Geiger et al., 2024; Méloux et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025, 

inter alia ). MI methods can be further clustered into two approaches: top-down and bottom-up .Top-down approaches start by enumerating hypotheses about the possible algorithms the model could be implementing. Then, they iterate through these hypotheses and isolate those with the closest causal alignment (Wu et al., 2023; Geiger et al., 2024; Bereska and Gavves, 2024; Vilas et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2025). On the other hand, bottom-up approaches are data-driven. They seek to directly find algorithmic explanations of the model’s mechanistic behaviors by analyzing activations or attention patterns (Nanda et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2024; Arditi et al., 2024; Nikankin et al., 2025). 

Casual Abstraction. Causal abstraction seeks to formally characterize when a symbolic explanation faithfully explains a data-generating process (in our application, this data-generating process would be a model) (Pearl, 2009; Peters et al., 2017; Beckers and Halpern, 2019; Beckers et al., 2020; Otsuka and Saigo, 2022). Causal abstraction as defined in Definition D.3 seeks to align “low-level” models (neural networks) with “high-level” models (symbolic explanations). These theoretical constructions have driven the development of many top-down mechanistic interpretability methods such as Wu et al. (2023); Geiger et al. (2024); Sun et al. (2025) which directly verify this condition. While causal abstraction provides a necessary condition for a valid interpretation, recent works such as Méloux et al. (2025) argue that it alone is insufficient to fully characterize what constitutes a valid interpretation. Practical procedures that stem from this theory also fail to address this. This highlights the need for additional theoretical frameworks to complement causal abstraction. On the other hand, causal abstraction represents a hard equivalence: two models either are or are not 

causal abstractions of each other. The binary nature of this definition fails to capture our intuition that explanations can vary in quality or completeness. Some interpretations may better capture the model’s behavior than others, or may only explain a subset of the model’s functionality. The hard equivalence of causal abstraction makes it difficult to reason about these partial or imperfect explanations. As a result, framemworks such as Beckers et al. (2020); Massidda et al. (2023) soften this criterion by introducing distance metrics on the total settings of the “high-level” model. In practice, these approaches face two main drawbacks: 1. It is challenging to define meaningful distance metrics when high-level interpretations involve discrete symbols and symbolic reasoning. 2. Comparing interpretations between models requires fully interpreting each model first, which forces a computationally expensive top-down analysis approach. Our framework addresses these limitations by focusing on implementations rather than interpretations directly. Since neural network computations are fundamentally real-valued, we can leverage natural distance metrics in their computational space. Additionally, by analyzing families of implementations rather than requiring complete interpretations, we can compare models’ interpretive similarity without the overhead of fully interpreting each model first. 17 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Representation Similarity. Representation similarity in neural networks has emerged as a fundamen-tal research area whcih addresses how internal representations correspond across different models, domains, and biological systems (Kornblith et al., 2019). We provide a brief overview of techniques to measure representation similarity, but encourage the reader to refer to Sucholutsky et al. (2023); Klabunde et al. (2025) for a comprehensive survey of the techniques within this field. Representations of deep neural networks have shown to exhibit an array of powerful properties. They have given insights into training dynamics and the generalization capabilities of models (Tishby et al., 2000; Xu and Raginsky, 2017; Shwartz Ziv and LeCun, 2024) and also provide a tractable method to compare the inductive biases between different models (Wang and Isola, 2020; Skean et al., 2025). These representations have also shown to admit rich geometric properties (Tulchinskii et al., 2023). In this paper, we measure representation through a learned linear regression. These techniques have been used extensively to compare different neural architecture and even human-language model similarity (Toneva and Wehbe, 2019; Muttenthaler et al., 2023). 

# C Experimental Details 

In this section, we detail our experimental methods. We first review constructs of RASP Weiss et al. (2021). Then, we demonstrate that RASP provides an interface to craft interpretations, and through methods like Geiger et al. (2024); Gupta et al. (2024) we can enumerate implementations of these interpretations. Lastly, we describe our experimental hyperparameters. 

C.1 RASP Interpretations 

Background on RASP Programs. The Restricted A ccess Sequence P rogramming (RASP) language is a functional programming model designed to capture the computational behavior of Transformer architdectures (Weiss et al., 2021). RASP programs have shown use in mechanistic interpretability both as an effective benchmarking tool for faithfulness (Conmy et al., 2023; Hanna et al., 2024) and as a method to develop “inherently” interpretable language models (Friedman et al., 2023). Another line of work uses it (and other similar methods) as a proof technique to reason about the Transformer architecture’s generalizability on a host of tasks (Weiss et al., 2021; Merrill et al., 2022; Giannou et al., 2023). In this paper, we focus on RASP’s applications in interpretability. RASP programs operate on two primary types of variables: s-ops , representing the input sequence, and selectors , corresponding to attention matrices. These variables are manipulated through two fundamental instructions: elementwise operations and select-aggregate. Elementwise operations 

simulate computations performed by a multilayer perceptron (MLP), while select-aggregate combines token-level operations, modeling the functionality of attention heads. Every RASP program is equipped with two global variables tokens and indices , essentially primitive s-ops . tokens maps strings into their token representations: 

token("code") = ["c", "o", "d", "e"] indices("code") = [0, 1, 2, 3] 

On the other hand, indices map n-length strings into their indices. That is, a list of [0, 1, . . . , n − 1].Elementwise operations can be computed through composition. That is, 

(3 * indices)("code") = [0, 3, 6, 9] (sin(indices)) = [sin(0), sin(1), sin(2), sin(3)] 

Tokens and their indices can also be mixed through selection matrices which are represented through the s-op select . This operations captures the mechanism of the QK-matrix. It takes as input two sequences K, Q, representing keys and queries respectively, and a Boolean predicate p and returns a matrix S of size |K| × | Q| such that Si j = p(Kj, Qi). Then, the OV-circuit can be computed through the select-aggregate operation, which performs an averaging over an arbitrary sequence with respect to the aforementioned selection matrix. For example, 

aggregate 

"1 0 00 0 01 1 0

#

, [10 20 30 ]

!

= [ 10 0 15 ] .

18 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 4: Pipeline for generating implementations for our interpretations (i.e. RASP language models). We first construct RASP programs, then using the procedure introduced in Lindner et al. (2023), we compile these programs into Transformer models. These Transformers exclusively have hard attention. Moreover, their architecture is minimal (containing only the necessary components to fully implement the given RASP program). We then apply the procedure introduced in Gupta et al. (2024) to translate these Tracr-Compiled Transformers into “real” Transformers: ones whose weight distribution matches those trained with stochastic gradient descent; these translated models also contain more The previous example is directly lifted from Lindner et al. (2023). 

Compiling RASP Programs. The power of RASP programming lies in its ability to translate any RASP program into a Transformer, a process known as compilation . As described in Lindner et al. (2023), this involves a two-stage approach. First, a computational graph is constructed by tracing the 

s-ops in the program, identifying how these operations interact with and modify the residual stream. Elementwise operations are converted into MLP weights, and individual components are heuristically assigned to Transformer layers. For further details, we refer the reader to Lindner et al. (2023). As observed by Lindner et al. (2023), this compilation through “translation” introduces inefficiencies. Specifically, the heuristic layer-assignment of RASP components results in Transformers that often contain more layers than they need to have. Moreover, since RASP enforces the use of categorical sequences and hard attention (we only allow Boolean predicates) it requires various s-ops to lie orthogonal to each other after embedding as Transformer weights. As a result, this leads to a much larger embedding dimension that is usually observed in actual Transformers (Elhage et al., 2022). Thus, Lindner et al. (2023) proposes to compress this dimension through a learned projection matrix. The caveat is that this transformation largely not faithful to the original program (measured through cosine similarity of the outputs at individual layers). Friedman et al. (2023) takes a different approach, addressing the inherent difficulty of writing RASP programs. To overcome this challenge, the authors propose a method for directly learning RASP programs. This is achieved by constraining the space of learnable weights to those that compile into valid RASP programs, ensuring outputs with categorical variables and hard attention mechanisms. Optimizing over this constrained hypothesis class is performed through a continuous relaxation using the Gumbel distribution (Jang et al., 2017). 

RASP Benchmarks. Thurnherr and Scheurer (2024) is a dataset of RASP programs that have been generated by GPT-4. It contains 121 RASP programs. Gupta et al. (2024) provides 86 RASP programs and compiled Transformers. The compiled Transformers are claimed to be more realistic than Tracr compiled ones as instead of performing compression using a linear projection, they leverage strict interchange intervention training essentially aligning the intervention effects of the compressed and uncompressed model. This is similar in vein to many existing techniques on causal abstraction Otsuka and Saigo (2022); Zennaro (2022); Massidda et al. (2023). In our paper, we leverage the curated dataset Gupta et al. (2024) to craft and compose our interpretations. 19 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

C.2 Strict Interchange Intervention Training 

To evaluate our methods, we need a way to verifiably ellicit different mechanisms on the same task. Let us first fix some task. Then, we proceed with the following steps: 1. Using Friedman et al. (2023), we learn several different explicit Transformer programs (source of randomness). We can check that they are different by looking explicitly at the Transformer programs. 2. Using Gupta et al. (2024) and Geiger et al. (2024) to get different mechanistic realizations of this abstract Transformer program. To generate different mechanistic instantiations of the same interpretation across architectures, we use the following procedure: First, we take a Tracr-Compiled Transformer model and initialize a new random model with at least as many layers and attention heads. Two models share the same interpretation if the Tracr-Compiled transformer is a causal abstraction of our mechanistic instantiation. We leverage this insight by softening Definition D.3 and incorporating it directly into our objective function. For a detailed treatment of this approach, we refer readers to Geiger et al. (2024); Gupta et al. (2024); Sun et al. (2025). To ensure diversity in our implementations, we vary the architecture hyperparameters significantly: models contain between 2-6 layers, 2-8 attention heads, and embedding dimensions ranging from 32 to 2048. This creates a rich set of instantiations with widely varying model capacities. As a result, many mechanisms in these larger models may not contribute to the core interpretations, leading to substantial interpretive compression. 

C.3 Interpretations for Permutation Detection 

To implement this task, we proceed with the following six interpretations. As discussed in Section 3.1, they can be roughly divided into two groups: sort- and counting-based. 

Interpretation 1. Sort the sequence ; compute the difference between each element and the next one; (3) Check if all elements of the sequence are equal. 

Interpretation 2. Sort the sequence in descending order; increment each element by its index; check if all elements of the sequence are equal. 

Interpretation 3. Sort the sequence ; interleave the list with the same list in reverse order; sum each number with the number next to it; (4) Check if all elements of the list are equal. 

Interpretation 4. Sort the sequence ; check if the list contains alternating even and odd elements. 

Interpretation 5. Check if at least two elements in the list are equal; sum each element with the next one in the list; check if all elements of the list are equal. 

Interpretation 6. Replace each element with the number of elements less than it in the sequence; check if at least two numbers are the same. For each of the subroutines of these interpretations, Gupta et al. (2024) implements RASP programs for them. Thus, we simply compose them together to create the resulting interpretations. 

C.4 Generating Implementations for IOI 

Herein, we describe how we generate implementations for the IOI task. For each model, we first identify a subset of the model’s attention heads that drive functional behavior. We do this through causal mediation analysis (which is well-documented in Wang et al. (2022) and Tigges et al. (2024)). For example, in GPT2-small this corresponds to attention heads (0.1, 0.10, 2.2, 4.11, 5.5, 6.9, etc., formatted as [layer index].[head index] ). The complement of this set are then components that are “unused” (see Section 2). For any input like (a) we construct a counterfactual input like (b) see below: (a) When John went to the store with Mary, John gave a bottle of milk to 

(b) When Mary went to the store with John, Mary gave a bottle of milk to 

20 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 5: Activation patching results for each attention head. The coloring indicates the % of performance this individual attention head contributes to POS performance. Then, we generate implementations by ablating the unused components. This is done by running the model on inputs like (a) and then for attention head in the ablation subset we patch in the output of the attention head as if it had been run on inputs like (b) .

C.5 Function Vectors and Parts-of-Speech Identification 

Function vectors have been found to drive in-context learning behavior (Todd et al., 2024). We leverage this concept to find the circuit that is responsible for in-context parts-of-speech identification. We use the Penn TreeBank dataset and consider the POS subtask. We sample n = 1000 points. We create counterfactual inputs by shuffling the in-context labels. For example, Clean Input: tree:noun, run:verb, quickly:adverb, ire: 

Corrupted Input: tree:adverb, run:noun, quickly:verb, ire: 

Then, we first run the model on the clean input and store all attention head output activations on the token “ire.” We then run the model on the corrupted input and patch in the stored attention head activations from the “ire” token. Finally, we compute the difference in logit difference loss of the generated next tokens before/after this patching operation. The results for each attention head are shown in Figure 5. It seems that attention heads in the early/middle layers are most important for POS (0.1, 0.4, 0.6, 4.11, 5.1, 5.5, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10, 7.11). Then, we compute the function vector by 

1

|A| ∑

> a∈An

# ∑

> k=1

a(xk), (C.1) where A is the set of attention heads that we have deemed important and xk is our dataset. Essentially, we are averaging the activations across all important attention heads. 

# D Formal Definitions 

We provide a glossary (see Table 1 and Table 2 for a summary) for our technical terms and notations in the main text along with their precise, formal definitions. Table 1: Glossary of terms.    

> Term Intuitive Explanation Formal Definition
> Causal/Computation Graph A graph that describes a model’s computational dependencies Definition 4.1

21 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Variables Nodes in a model’s computation graph that store latent computation results Definition 4.1 Circuit A subset of the model’s computational graph that on its own can fully recreate the model’s input-output behavior Definition D.1 Mechanistic Explanation A symbolic algorithm, we can understand, that explains the model’s computation N/A Causal Abstraction Mapping from low-level variables to higher-level ones that preserve low-level causal relationships Definition D.3 Interpretation A causal graph much smaller than the model’s computation graph that explains the model’s com-putation graph Definition D.4 Representations A causal graph that is a chain that abstracts a model’s circuit Definition 4.3 Alignment A mapping between two causal graphs that pre-serves meaningful causal relations between vari-ables Definition D.3 Intervention A modification to the model’s computation graph Definition D.2 Alignment Class A set of alignments that map to the same interpre-tation Definition 5.1 Implementation Sets of circuits that share the same interpretation Definition 5.1 Interpretive Equivalence Measure of distance between sets of implementa-tions Definition 5.2 Interpretive Compression Measure of diameter of a set of implementations Definition 5.3 Congruity Approximation for interpretive equivalence Definition H.1 Representation Similarity Extent to which one set of representations can be linearly transformed into the other and vice versa Definition G.1 

Table 2: Notations used throughout our formal treatment. This is partially adapted from both Geiger et al. (2025) and Ravfogel et al. (2025). 

Symbol Meaning 

Σ An alphabet 

Σ⋆ Set of all finite strings constructed from Σ

S A subset of Σ⋆

A An interpretation 

K A circuit 

R A representation 

V Set of variables in a causal model 

U Input variable to causal model 

F Functions in causal model that determine variable values 

≻ Partial ordering over variables of causal model induced by FVF(u) Solution of all variables to input u

vF 

> k

(u) Solution of vk to input u

π An alignment between variables of two causal models 

Π A class of alignments 

Π−1(A) The set of implementations of A induced by alignments Π

dinterp Interpretive equivalence 

dH Hausdorff distance 

κ(A, K, Π) Interpretive compression 

drepr Representation similarity 

Lip ( f ) Lipschitz constant of f

> i.i.d.

∼ Sample i.i.d from some distribution 

Definition D.1 (Circuit) . An m-circuit of h on S is a causal graph with m components that satisfies four properties: 1. Input variable is S-valued: U ∈ S

2. Hidden variables are real-valued: for each vk ∈ V, v ∈ Rnk

3. Existence of a terminal output variable: vout ∈ V such that vout ∈ Rd , and there does not exist v′ ∈ V where vout ≻ v′

22 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 4. Sufficient description of h on S: for each s ∈ S, vF

> out

(s) = h(s)

Remark. For any h and m ≥ 1, an m-circuit of h must exist by the trivial causal model. To see this, let 

U ∈ S and vout ≜ h(U). Then, for any 1 ≤ i ≤ m − 1, define vi ≜ U 7 → 1. In other words, we construct a causal graph with effectively one variable, letting the other hidden variables be constant functions. 

Remark. m-circuits are also not unique. For instance, a joint change of bases to any vk ∈ V \ vout and 

fk results in a new causal model that preserves functional faithfulness to h (Park et al., 2024; Geiger et al., 2024). 

Definition D.2 (Intervention) . Let (V,U, F, ≻) be a causal model. An intervention of vk ∈ V,

do (vk ← ˜f ), redefines vk ≜ ˜f ( ˜Pa (vk),U), for ˜Pa (vk) ⊂ { v ∈ V : v ≻ vk}. We denote the set of interventions on vk as I (vk).In other words, we replace the process used to derive vk’s value, f , with a new function ˜f . Given any circuit, one type of concrete intervention is activation patching . For a set of hidden variables, we patch its solutions using values derived from some other input (Vig et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Heimersheim and Nanda, 2024, inter alia ). Interventions often serve as a check of consistency between circuits and their interpretations (Beckers and Halpern, 2019; Geiger et al., 2021). We define this notion next. 

Definition D.3 (Abstraction) . Let K1 ≜ (V,U, F, ≻1), K2 ≜ ( ˜V, ˜U, ˜F, ≻2) be causal models. K2

abstracts K1 if there exists surjective mappings π : SubsetsOf (V) → ˜V, ω : I (V) → I ( ˜V) that satisfies for all vk ∈ V, ˜vk ∈ ˜V, do (vk ← f ) ∈ I (vk):

˜vk = π

 [ 

> vk∈π−1(˜vk)

fk(Pa (vk),U)

 , (D.1) 

π(do (vk ← f )) = do (π(vk) ← ω( f )) . (D.2) We call π an alignment .Equation (D.1) describes an observational consistency constraint: if K2 abstracts K1, then by only observing the hidden variables of K1 we can infer all hidden values of K2. Viewed under this lens, the alignment π projects the fine-grained variables V to the coarse-grained ones ˜V. On the other hand, Equation (D.2) is an intervention consistency constraint—stating that π and ω must commute. In words, this means that if we apply the intervention do (vk ← f ) to yield a new causal model and then abstract that causal model through alignment π, this is equivalent to abstracting the causal model and then applying the transformed intervention on the high-level model. This implies that all of the causal relationships between variables in K2 can be constructed by relationships between variables in K1.Under this light, an interpretation of a circuit is simply an abstraction. 

Definition D.4 (Interpretation) . A causal model A ≜ (V⋆,U, F⋆, ≻) that abstracts a circuit K ≜

(V,U, F, ≻) is an η-faithful interpretation of K if there exists an output variable v⋆ 

> out

∈ V⋆ such that 

∥v⋆, F 

> out

− vF

> out

∥ < η for the output variable vout ∈ V.

Remark. Interpretations are abstractions of circuits . However, Definition D.4 does not rely on the fact that circuits have real-valued hidden variables. Since interpretations also have an output variable, one could further construct an interpretation of an interpretation (Proposition F.2). 

Remark. For any circuit, K is an interpretation of itself (under the identity abstraction), albeit this is not very useful. 

Remark. We do not require that A’s variables be real-valued, nor do we require that there exists a metric over the solutions of A (in contrast to K). This is compatible with the conventions in mechanistic interpretability where often an interpretation is a symbolic description of K that may not necessarily be performing numeric computation. 

# E Interpretations Must Be Abstraction Dependent 

Our notion of an interpretation is dependent on a fixed level of abstraction (the variable set V). This requirement may seem stringent, especially since we colloquially think of interpretations (or algorithms) as abstraction-independent entities. Further, abstraction-dependent interpretations 23 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 immediately give rise to non-identifiability , where a single interpretation may correspond many implementations (at different levels of abstraction) and a single circuit may also correspond many interpretations, each at a different level of abstraction. In this section, we argue that non-identifiability is a necessary price we must pay for a meaningful comparison between interpretations. Our main result here is that if defined over an existence statement of V interpretive equivalence must collapse to functional equivalence. 

Theorem E.1. For i ∈ { 1, 2}, let S ⊂ Σ⋆ and hi be a language model such that h1(S) = h2(S). Suppose that hi admit a circuit Ki ≜ (Vi,U, Fi, ≻). Then, 1. For i ∈ { 1, 2}, there exists an abstraction of Ki, Ai ≜ (VA,U, FAi , ≻) such that there is a 

bijective translation 12 (Definition E.1) between A1, A2.2. There is a language model h⋆ with circuit K⋆ such that h⋆(S) = h1(S) = h2(S) and K1, K2

are abstractions of K⋆.3. If both K1, K2 are not minimal (i.e. there exists at least one causal variable such that any intervention does not affect its output), then there exists a bijective translation between 

K1, K2.

Since we do not require circuits to be minimal (see Section 4), statement (3) implies that we must restrict the set of permissible alignments. Otherwise, any non-minimal circuit is 0-interpretively equivalent to any other non-minimal circuit (see Proposition F.4). Recall that for any causal model K ≜ (V,U, F, ≻), given an input U ← u, there exists a solution to each of its variables which we denote as VF(u). If K is an m-circuit, then 

VF(u) ∈ Σ⋆ × Rn1 × . . . × Rnm × R|Σ|. (E.1) For brevity, we slightly abuse the notation and denote VF ≜ Rn1 × . . . × Rnm × R|Σ|. In words, a 

bijective translation is a causally-consistent, bijective mapping between the solutions of two causal models. Essentially, if one model is a bijective translation of another, we can think of it simply as a relabeling of the other one. 

Definition E.1. For i ∈ { 1, 2}, let Ki ≜ (Vi,U, Fi, ≻) be a causal model. For any u ∈ S, τ : VF1 

> 1

→ VF2

> 2

is a bijective translation if τ satisfies Equation (D.1) and there exists ω : I (V1) → I (V2) that satisfies Equation (D.2). 

Proposition E.2. For any n, m ∈ Z+, there exists a bijection between Rn and Rm.

We are now ready for the proof of Theorem E.1. 

Proof. We prove all claims constructively. 1. For i ∈ { 1, 2}, let Ai be the trivial causal model associated with hi: it has two causal variables 

U, vout such that vout ≜ hi(U). Consider an an alignment map πi such that πi(vout ) = vout ,

πi(U) = U, and for all other v ∈ Vi, πi(v) = ⊥ (i.e. π is undefined on other variables in Vi). Define the intervention map ω to be the identity if and only if do (vk ← f ) ∈ I (Vi) is an intervention on U or vout . Then, it follows that the only valid interventions defined by ω are those directly on the input and output variables. It is easy to see that both Equation (D.1) and (D.2) hold. Since h1 = h2, A1, A2 constructed in this way are the same causal model. Thus, the identity map forms a trivial bijective translation between them. 2. Let K⋆ ≜ (V,U, F, ≻) such that V = V1 ∪ V2 ∪ { U, vout }. Construct F such that it runs K1, K2

in parallel and then averages their output. Concretely, let v1out , v2out ∈ V be the output variables of V1, V2, respectively. Also let U1,U2 ∈ V be their input variables. Define 

Pa (U1) = Pa (U2) = {U} Pa (vout ) = {v1out , v2out },

and their transition functions 

fU1 (U) = fU2 (U) = U fvout ({v1out , v2out },U) = 12



fv1out (Pa (v1out ),U) + fv2out (Pa (v2out ),U)



.

> 12 In general, a bijective translation is neither stronger nor weaker than an abstraction (Geiger et al., 2025).

24 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Clearly, K⋆ is a valid circuit for some language model h = h1 = h2. Let π1, π2 be the identity alignments from K⋆ → Ki. By the same constructive above for ω, K1, K2 must be both be an abstraction for K⋆.3. Let τ be the identity function that maps v1out ∈ V1 → v2out ∈ V2. By Definition 4.2, for i ∈ { 1, 2},any variable vk ∈ Vi \ { U, vi

> out

} takes on values in Rmk for mk ∈ Z+. By assumption, for both models K1, K2, there exists at least one causal variable that is “unused.“ Denote this variable as 

vi

> unused

. By Proposition E.2, there exists a bijection that maps σ : V1 \{ U, vout , v1unused } → v2unused .Composing σ ◦ τ yields a bijection from VF1 

> 1

→ VF2 

> 2

. It is easy to see that this is a bijective translation which satisfies Equation (D.1) and (D.2) . By symmetry, the other direction also holds. 

# F Properties of Interpretive Equivalence and Compression 

As discussed in Section 5, an interpretation of a model need not be a lossless description of that model. For many applications an interpretable explanation is necessarily lossy with respect to the learned model. In this sense, an abstraction alone is too restrictive as it requires any interpretation to preserve the exact functional behavior of the model. Herein, we explore some properties of interpretive equivalence, compression and illustrate their similarities and differences with causal abstraction. We first show that both implementations and interpretations compose. That is, an implementation of an implementation is also an implementation and an interpretation of an interpretation is also an interpretation .

Lemma F.1. For i ∈ { 1, 2, 3}, let Ki ≜ (Vi,U, Fi, ≻i) be causal models. Let π1,2 be an alignment from 

K1 → K2 and π2,3 an alignment from K2 → K3. Then, K3 is an abstraction of K1 with an alignment map π2,3 ◦ π1,2.Remark F.1 (On Composing Alignments) . We are liberally abusing the notation here. Technically, the composition π2,3 ◦ π1,2 is not well defined since the alignments have incompatible types: π1,2 :SubsetsOf (V1) → V2 and π2,3 : SubsetsOf (V2) → V3. We write π2,3 ◦ π1,2 to mean the process of starting from the causal graph K1 applying the alignment π1,2 to yield a new causal graph K2 and then applying the alignment π2,3 to yield the causal graph K3. This is possible because an alignment alone is sufficient to induce an abstraction (see Geiger et al. 2025, Remark 32 for a construction). 

Proof. We first check Equation (D.1) . Since π2,3 is an alignment that enables K2 to abstract K1, for any v3 

> k

∈ V3,

v3 

> k

= π2,3

 [   

> v2
> k∈π−12,3(v3
> k)

f 2 

> k

(Pa (v2 

> k

),U)

 .

By Definition 4.1, v2 

> k

= f 2 

> k

(Pa (v2 

> k

),U). Then, because K2 is an abstraction of K1 through the alignment map π1,2, it follows that 

v3 

> k

= π2,3

 [   

> v2
> k∈π−12,3(v3
> k)

π1,2

 [   

> v1
> k∈π−11,2(v2
> k)

f 1 

> k

(Pa (v1 

> k

),U)

 ,

= ( π2,3 ◦ π1,2)

 [   

> v2
> k∈π−12,3(v3
> k)

 [   

> v1
> k∈π−11,2(v2
> k)

f 1 

> k

(Pa (v1 

> k

),U)

 ,

= ( π2,3 ◦ π1,2)

 [  

> v1
> k∈(π2,3◦π1,2)−1(v3
> k)

f 1 

> k

(Pa (v1 

> k

),U)

 .

It remains to show that the mappings between interventions holds. Denote ω1,2 : I (V1) → I (V2)

and ω2,3 : I (V2) → I (V3). We claim that Equation (D.2) is satisfied with ω2,3 ◦ ω1,2. Since ω1,2

25 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 and ω2,3 satisfy Equation (D.2), 

π2,3(do (v2 

> k

← f )) = do (π2,3(v2 

> k

) ← ω2,3( f )) ,

π2,3(π1,2(do (v1 

> k

← f ))) = do (π2,3(π1,2(v1 

> k

)) ← ω2,3(ω1,2( f ))) ,

(π2,3 ◦ π1,2)( do (v1 

> k

← f )) = do (( π2,3 ◦ π1,2)( v1 

> k

) ← (ω2,3 ◦ ω1,2)( f )) ,

where v2 

> k

∈ V2, v1 

> k

∈ π−11,2 (v2 

> k

), and f are chosen arbitrarily. 

Proposition F.2. Let K ≜ (V,U, F, ≻) be a circuit. Let A ≜ (VA,U, FA, ≻) be an η-faithful interpretation of K through an alignment π. Let A⋆ ≜ (V⋆

> A

,U, F⋆

> A

, ≻) be an η-faithful interpretation of A through an alignment π⋆. Then, A⋆ is an 2η-faithful interpretation of K through an alignment 

π⋆ ◦ π.Proof. There exists an alignment π from K → A and an alignment π⋆ A → A⋆. By Lemma F.1, A⋆ is an abstraction of K with the alignment map π⋆ ◦ π. There exists a variable vA⋆ 

> out

∈ V⋆

> A

, vA 

> out

∈ VA such that vA⋆ 

> out

− vA 

> out

< η and a variable vout ∈ V such that vA 

> out

− vout < η. By triangle inequality, 

vA⋆ 

> out

− vout < 2η.

Proposition F.3. Let K ≜ (V,U, F, ≻) be a circuit. Let A be an η-interpretation of K and Π be an alignment class that maps K’s variables onto A’s. Let A⋆ be an η-interpretation of A and Π⋆ be an alignment class that maps A’s variables onto A⋆’s. Then, Π−1(Π−1 

> ⋆

(A⋆)) are implementations of A⋆.Proof. The proof is trivial and directly follows from Proposition F.2. We now relate interpretive equivalence to causal abstraction and show necessary and sufficient conditions for interpretive equivalence using abstractions. For i ∈ { 1, 2}, let K ≜ (V,U, F, ≻) be circuits with η-interpretations Ai ≜ (VAi ,U, FAi , ≻). Let Πi be alignment classes that map Ki’s variables onto Ai’s variables. 

Proposition F.4. Suppose A1 is an abstraction of A2 and vice versa through alignment maps π1,2, π2,1.

A1, A2 are 0-interpretively equivalent if π2,1 ◦ Π1 ⊂ Π2 and π1,2 ◦ Π2 ⊂ Π1.Proof. We show that Π−11 (A1) ⊂ Π−12 (A2). Take any F ∈ Π−11 (A1). By Definition 5.1, there exists π1 ∈ Π1 that forms an abstraction from (V,U, F, ≻) → (VA 

> 1

,U, FA 

> 1

, ≻). By Lemma F.1, 

π2,1 ◦ π1 is an alignment that forms an abstraction from (V,U, F, ≻) → (VA 

> 2

,U, FA 

> 2

, ≻). Since 

π2,1 ◦ π1 ∈ Π−12 (A2), this implies that F ∈ Π−12 (A2). Applying the same argument in the other direction, Π−12 (A2) ⊂ Π−11 (A1). Therefore, Π−11 (A1) = Π−12 (A2) and by Definition 5.2, A1, A2 are 0-interpretively equivalent. 

Proposition F.5. Let Π−1 

> i

(Ai) be closed. Suppose A1, A2 are 0-interpretively equivalent. Suppose there exists πi ∈ Πi that each admits a section , si : VAi 7 → SubsetsOf (Vi), such that πi(si(v)) = v, for any v ∈ VAi . Suppose that there exists some π′

> 1

, π′ 

> 2

such that π′ 

> 2

◦ s1 ◦ π1 ∈ Π2 and π′ 

> 1

◦ s2 ◦ π2 ∈ Π1.Then, A1 is an abstraction of A2 and vice versa with alignment maps π′ 

> 2

◦ s1, π′ 

> 1

◦ s2.Proof. Since Π−1 

> i

(Ai) is closed, Definition 5.2 implies that Π−11 (A1) = Π−12 (A2). For brevity, we denote π2,1 ≜ π′ 

> 2

◦ s1. Note that π2,1 : VA 

> 1

→ VA 

> 2

, we can easily extend this to subsets V ⊂ VA 

> 1

by 

π2,1(V ) ≜ π′

> 2

[

> v∈V

s1(v)

!

. (F.1) Now, we refer to π2,1 as Equation (F.1) . We first show that π2,1 satisfies Equation (D.1) . Fix v2 ∈ VA 

> 2

.By Definition 4.1, 

v2 ≜ fv2 (Pa (v2),U). (F.2) 26 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 By assumption, π2,1 ◦ π1 ∈ Π2. Thus, π2,1 ◦ π1 is an alignment map that enables an abstraction from 

K → A2, we can rewrite Equation (F.2) as 

v2 = ( π2,1 ◦ π1)

 [

> vk∈(π2,1◦π1)−1(v2)

fvk (Pa (vk),U)

 , (F.3) 

= ( π2,1 ◦ π1)

 [ 

> vk∈π−12,1(v2)

[ 

> v∈π−11(vk)

fv (Pa (v),U)

 , (F.4) 

= π2,1

π1

 [ 

> vk∈π−12,1(v2)

[ 

> v∈π−11(vk)

fv (Pa (v),U)

 , (F.5) 

= π2,1

 [ 

> vk∈π−12,1(v2)

π1

 [ 

> v∈π−11(vk)

fv (Pa (v),U)

 , (F.6) 

= π2,1

 [ 

> vk∈π−12,1(v2)

fvk (Pa (vk),U)

 . (F.7) The last equality follows from the fact that π1 is an alignment. Therefore, π2,1 satisfies Equation (D.1) .By the same argument, this also holds for π1,2. It remains to check Equation (D.2) . Since π′

> 2

, π′ 

> 1

are alignments, they admit ω′

> 2

, ω′ 

> 1

that satisfy Equation (D.2) . Let t2,t1 be sections of ω′

> 2

, ω′

> 1

, respectively. We claim that ω2,1 ≜ ω′ 

> 2

◦t1 satisfies Equation (D.2) . Since π2,1 ◦ π1 is an alignment, and take vk ∈ V,

(π2,1 ◦ π1)( do (vk ← f )) = do (( π2,1 ◦ π1)( vk) ← (ω2,1 ◦ ω′

> 1

)( f )) ,

π2,1(π1(do (vk ← f ))) = do (π2,1(π1(vk)) ← ω2,1(ω′

> 1

( f ))) ,

π2,1(do (π1(vk) ← ω′

> 1

( f ))) = do (π2,1(π1(vk)) ← ω2,1(ω′

> 1

( f ))) .

do (π1(vk) ← ω′

> 1

( f )) ∈ I (VA 

> 1

) and π1(vk) ∈ VA 

> 1

. Thus, through relabeling, v1 

> k

≜ π1(vk) and 

f1 ≜ ω′

> 1

( f ),

π2,1(do (v1 

> k

← f1)) = do (π2,1(v1 

> k

) ← ω2,1( f1)) .

And, Equation (D.2) holds. 

# G Proofs for Representation Similarity and Interpretive Equivalence 

Suppose we have two circuits over a shared task S for models h1, h2 defined over different neural architectures. These circuits we notate as K1 ≜ (V1,U, F1, ≻) and K2 ≜ (V2,U, F2, ≻), respectively. Let us also assume each circuit admits an (Li, δi)-representation Ri ≜ (Hi,U, Fi, ≻) through alignment maps ρi. First, we define a notion of distance between these two representations. We note that since the representations themselves are a function of the input (recall Definition 4.1), we are essentially defining a distance in a function space. 

Definition G.1 (Representation Similarity) . Denote by Hi ≜ concat (HFi 

> i

) to be the direct sum (concatenation) of all hidden variables in Hi. Then, representation similarity 13 between R1 and R2 is 

drepr (R1, R2) ≜ max inf  

> ∥A∥op ≤1

∥AH 1 − H2∥ , inf  

> ∥B∥op ≤1

∥H1 − BH 2∥

!

, (G.1) where A, B are linear operators and ∥·∥ is a direct-sum norm. 

> 13

Our formulation is inspired by Chan et al.’s (2024) notion of representation alignment between language encoders. Although Definition G.1 is not a true similarity, this naming stays consistent with the literature (Kornblith et al., 2019). 

27 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 We first show that representation similarity (Definition G.1) is a pseudometric. 

Lemma G.1. For any representations R1, R2, R3, drepr satisfies 1. drepr (R1, R1) = 0

2. drepr (R1, R2) = drepr (R2, R2)

3. drepr (R1, R3) ≤ drepr (R1, R2) + drepr (R2, R3)

Proof. The first two properties are trivial. So, it remains to show triangle inequality. Let Hi be the con-catenation of hidden variables in Ri. Let ϕ1,2, ϕ2,3 be arbitrary operators where ∥ϕ1,2∥op , ∥ϕ2,3∥op ≤ 1

that map H2 → H1 and H3 → H2, respectively. Then, 

∥H1 − ϕ1,2 ◦ ϕ2,3H3∥ = ∥H1 − ϕ1,2H2 + ϕ1,2H2 − ϕ1,2 ◦ ϕ2,3H3∥ ,

≤ ∥ H1 − ϕ1,2H2∥ + ∥ϕ1,2H2 − ϕ1,2 ◦ ϕ2,3H3∥ ,

≤ ∥ H1 − ϕ1,2H2∥ + ∥ϕ1,2∥op ∥H2 − ϕ2,3H3∥≤ ∥ H1 − ϕ1,2H2∥ + ∥H2 − ϕ2,3H3∥ .

Taking infimum over ϕ1,2, ϕ2,3 gives the desired result. 

Definition G.2. Let (Z, d) be a (pseudo)metric space. Let S ⊂ Z. The diameter of S, denoted 

diameter (S) is defined as 

diameter (S) := sup 

> a,b∈S

d(a, b). (G.2) 

Lemma G.2. Let (Z, d) be a (pseudo)metric space and dH be its Hausdorff distance. Then, for 

A, B ⊂ Z and a ∈ A, b ∈ B,

dH(A, B) ≤ diameter (A) + diameter (B) + d(a, b).

Proof. Fix any a′ ∈ A. Then, 

inf  

> b′∈B

d(a′, b′) ≤ d(a′, b),

≤ d(a′, a) + d(a, b),

≤ diameter (A) + d(a, b).

By symmetry, for any b′ ∈ A, it follows that inf a′∈A d(a′, b′) ≤ diameter (B) + d(a, b). Therefore, by the definition of the Hausdorff distance, we yield the desired bound. 

Definition G.3. Let K1 ≜ (V,U, F1, ·), K2 ≜ (V,U, F2, ·) be two arbitrary circuits defined over variables 

V. Suppose some pseudometric d : V × V → R≥0. Let R ≜ (H,U, ·, ≺) be representation spaces and 

ρ : SubsetsOf (V) → H an alignment map. Denote Ri the representations of Ki constructed through ρ.We say that ρ is Lipschitz continuous with Lipschitz constant Lip (ρ) if 

drepr (R1, R2) ≤ Lip (ρ)d(F1, F2). (G.3) 

Lemma G.3. For i ∈ { 1, 2} let Ri be (·, δi)-representations for models hi. Suppose that ∥h1 − h2∥ < ∆.Then, drepr (R1, R2) ≤ δ1 + δ2 + ∆.Proof. Let Hi be the concatenation of all hidden variables in Ri. Since Ri is a (Li, δi)-representation, there must exist maps Ai, Bi such that 

∥AiHi − hi∥ < δi and ∥Hi − Bihi∥ < δi.

To see this, we know that for each hidden layer k, there exists Ai,k such that Ai,kHi,k − hi < δi. Then, 

Liδi ≥

> Li

# ∑

> k=1

Ai,kHi,k − hi ≥

> Li

# ∑

> k=1

(Ai,kHi,k − hi) =

> Li

# ∑

> k=1

Ai,kHi,k − Lihi . (G.4) Define a single (block diagonal) linear map Ai that acts on Hi = ( Hi,1, . . . , Hi,Li ) where 

∥AiHi∥ ≜ 1

LiLi

# ∑

> k=1

Ai,kHi,k .

28 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 With the ℓ∞ direct-sum norm on L 

> k

Rnk and ∥Ai∥op ≤ 1. Substituting Ai into Equation (G.4) , we have that ∥AiHi − hi∥ < δi. Repeating same construction for Bi yields the “decoder” inequality. Consider inf A0 ∥A0H1 − H2∥,

inf 

> A0

∥A0H1 − H2∥ ≤ ∥ B2A1H1 − H2∥ ,

≤ ∥ B2A1H1 − B2h2∥ + ∥B2h2 − H2∥ ,

≤ ∥ B2∥op (∥A1H1 − h1∥ + ∥h1 − h2∥) + δ2,

≤ δ1 + δ2 + ∆.

The same argument also holds in the other direction: 

inf 

> A0

∥H1 − A0H2∥ ≤ ∥ H1 − B1A2H2∥ ,

≤ ∥ H1 − B1h1∥ + ∥B1h1 − B1A2H2∥ ,

≤ δ1 + ∥B1∥op (∥h1 − h2∥ + ∥h2 − A2H2∥) ,

≤ δ1 + δ2 + ∆.

By Definition G.1, drepr (R1, R2) ≤ δ1 + δ2 + ∆.

G.1 Proof of Main Result 1 

For i ∈ { 1, 2}, suppose that Ai is an ηi-faithful interpretation of Ki. Let Π, Π⋆ be alignment classes that map K1’s variables onto A1, A2’s variables, respectively. Assume that circuits admit Li-layered representations through an alignment map ρi. Let F, ˜F ∈ Π−1(A1), then VF : Σ⋆ → Rn for some 

n ∈ Z+ (Definition 4.2). 

Assumption G.4. Let Φ : Rn → Rm and assume the implementation distance d is in the form 

d(F, ˜F) ≜ ∥ΦVF − ΦV ˜F ∥,

for some function norm. 

Φ is a distillation map that compiles all of the activations of VF into a tractable representation. In a sense, Φ exposes the measurable part of VF . Denote RF to be the representations of F constructed through the alignment map ρ1. Since RF is a deterministic causal model (Definition 4.3), we denote 

HF : Σ⋆ → Rp to be the solution of all variables in RF given some input setting. In other words, 

HF is the concatenation of all hidden representations of RF . This is the same construction used in Definition G.1. 

Assumption G.5. Assume there exists a 1-Lipschitz map Ψ : Rp → Rm such that 

∥ΨHF − ΨH ˜F ∥ ≤ drepr (RF , R ˜F ) and ΦVF − ΨHF < ω. (G.5) In other words, the measurable part of our circuit is approximately determined by its representation. Next, we assume that there exists at least one implementation in Π−1 

> ⋆

(A2) that admits a reasonable representation under ρ1. Since we only enforce that ρ1 is a valid abstraction map for K1, without this assumption, one could construct an adversarial implementation of A2 whose causal variables are completely discarded by ρ1.

Assumption G.6. There exists F⋆ ∈ Π−1 

> ⋆

(A2) such that its representation under ρ1, RF⋆ , is an 

(L1, δ1)-representation. We are now ready to prove the main result. 

Main Result. Let Π and Π⋆ be alignment classes that map K1’s variables into A1, A2’s variables, respectively. Then, the approximate interpretive equivalence of A1, A2 under alignments Π−1, Π−1 

> ⋆

is 

dinterp (A1, A2) ≤ κ(A1, K1, Π) + κ(A2, K1, Π⋆) + 2ω + drepr (R1, R2) + δ1 + δ2 + ∆. (G.6) 

Proof. By Lemma G.2, for any F ∈ Π−1(A1), ˜F ∈ Π−1 

> ⋆

(A2),

dinterp (A1, A2) ≤ κ(A1, K1, Π) + κ(A2, K1, Π⋆) + d(F, ˜F).

29 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 So it remains to upper bound d(F, ˜F) for a single pair (F, ˜F). Let us choose F to be the circuit K1

which has representations R1. By Assumption G.6, choose ˜F ∈ Π−1 

> ⋆

(A2) that admits an (L1, δ1)-representation (which we denote as R ˜F ) under the alignment ρ1. By Assumption G.4, 

d(F, ˜F) ≜ ∥ΦVF − ΦV ˜F ∥.

We add and subtract ΨHF , ΨH ˜F ,

d(F, ˜F) ≤ ∥ ΦVF − ΨHF ∥ + ∥ΨHF − ΨH ˜F ∥ + ∥ΨH ˜F − ΦV ˜F ∥,

≤ 2ω + ∥ΨHF − ΨH ˜F ∥.

Since Ψ is 1-Lipschitz ∥ΨHF − ΨH ˜F ∥ ≤ drepr (R1, R ˜F ), where R ˜F is the causal model associated with 

H ˜F . By triangle inequality, 

drepr (R1, R ˜F ) ≤ drepr (R1, R2) + drepr (R2, R ˜F ),

≤ drepr (R1, R2) + δ1 + δ2 + ∆.

The last inequality follows from Assumption G.6 and Lemma G.3. Putting it all together, 

dinterp (A1, A2) ≤ κ(A1, K1, Π) + κ(A2, K1, Π⋆) + 2ω + drepr (R1, R2) + δ1 + δ2 + ∆.

G.2 Proof of Main Result 2 

For i ∈ { 1, 2}, let us denote Ai as ηi-faithful interpretations of Ki.

Main Result. Let Π and Π⋆ be an alignment that map K1’s variables onto A1, A2’s variables. Suppose 

A1, A2 are ε-approximate interpretively equivalent under the alignment classes Π⋆, Π. Then, 

drepr (R1, R2) ≤ ε(Lip (ρ1) + 1) + δ1 + δ2 + ∆. (G.7) 

Proof. Since A1, A2 are ε-interpretively equivalent under the alignment cases Π, Π⋆, there exists 

F′ 

> 2

∈ Π⋆(A2) such that d(F1, F′

> 2

) ≤ ε. Let R1, R′ 

> 2

be the representations of F1, F′ 

> 2

under the alignment 

ρ1, respectively. Then, ρ1 is Lipschitz continuous implies that 

drepr (R1, R′

> 2

) ≤ Lip (ρ1)d(F1, F′

> 2

) ≤ Lip (ρ1)ε. (G.8) Since R1 is an (L1, δ1)-representation of h1, there exists A1, B1 with ∥A1∥op , ∥B1∥op ≤ 1 such that 

∥A1H1 − h1∥ ≤ δ1 and ∥H1 − B1h1∥ ≤ δ1,

where H1 is the concatenation of all variables in R1. drepr (R1, R′

> 2

) ≤ Lip (ρ1)ε implies there exists 

A′, B′ such that 

A′H1 − H′ 

> 2

≤ Lip (ρ1)ε and H1 − B′H′ 

> 2

≤ Lip (ρ1)ε,

where H′ 

> 2

is the concatenation of all variables in R′

> 2

. We now bound the “encoder” and “decoder” error of R′ 

> 2

separately: 

A1A′H′ 

> 2

− h2 ≤ A1(A′H′ 

> 2

− H1) + ∥A1H1 − h1∥ + ∥h1 − h2∥ ,

≤ ∥ A1∥op A′H′ 

> 2

− H1 + δ1 + ∆,

≤ Lip (ρ1)ε + δ1 + ∆.

And, 

H′ 

> 2

− B′B1h2 ≤ H′ 

> 2

− B′H1 + B′(H1 − B1h1) + B′B1(h1 − h2) ,

≤ Lip (ρ1)ε + δ1 + ∆.

Therefore, R′ 

> 2

is a (L1, Lip (ρ1)ε + δ1 + ∆)-representation of h2. Directly applying Lemma G.3, 

drepr (R′

> 2

, R2) ≤ Lip (ρ1)ε + δ1 + δ2 + ∆. By Lemma G.1, 

drepr (R1, R2) ≤ drepr (R1, R′

> 2

) + drepr (R′

> 2

, R2) ≤ ε(Lip (ρ1) + 1) + δ1 + δ2 + ∆.

Where is faithfulness in all of this? Unintuitively, neither Main Result 1 nor 2 explicitly contain the faithfulness of A1, A2 (η1, η2, respectively). Our insight is that faithfulness is implicitly encoded into the alignment classes Π, Π⋆. This is because any valid alignment must be consistent with the faithfulness of A1, A2 (see Definition 5.1). In this way, η1, η2 determine which alignment classes are non-empty. This is why alignment classes form the crux of our constructions, because they describe both structural and behavioral constraints over abstractions. 30 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# H Computing Interpretive Equivalence 

For i ∈ { 1, 2}, let Ai be an interpretation and Ki be a circuit. Let Πi be an alignment class that maps 

Ki’s variables into Ai’s variables. We define probability spaces (Π−1 

> i

(Ai), ·, PAi ). Suppose ρ1, ρ2 are alignment maps. 

Definition H.1 (Congruity) . Denote F1, F⋆

> 1i.i.d.

∼ P1, F2, F⋆

> 2i.i.d.

∼ P2. Let R1, R⋆

> 1

, R2, R⋆ 

> 2

be their repre-sentations, respectively, under the alignment maps ρ1, ρ2.

p1 ≜ P[drepr (R1, R⋆

> 1

) < drepr (R1, R2)] p2 ≜ P[drepr (R2, R⋆

> 2

) < drepr (R2, R1)] , (H.1) where P is the joint distribution over Π−11 (A1) × Π−12 (A2). The congruity between Π−11 (A1), Π−12 (A2)

is 1 − | p1 + p2 − 1|.In one direction (say p1), we sample two implementations from Π−11 (A1) and one from Π−12 (A2). p1

is the probability that the two A1 representations are more similar to each other than either does to the 

A2 implementation. If Π−11 (A1) = Π−12 (A2) and P1 = P2, then p1 = p2 = 1/2 and congruity is 1. In other words, A1, A2 are completely congruous with respect to their representations. 

H.1 Proof of Main Result 3 

For clarity, the result is restated. 

Main Result. Let p be the expected value of ReprDist in Algorithm 1, F1, F⋆

> 1i.i.d.

∼ P1, and F2 i.i.d.

∼ P2.Let R1, R⋆

> 1

, R2 be their representations under alignment maps ρ1, ρ2. Then, 

p ≥ 1 − inf 

> ε>0

 P[drepr (R1, R⋆

> 1

) > κ(A1, K1, Π1) + ε] + P[drepr (R1, R2) < dinterp (A1, A2) − ε] . (H.2) 

Proof. Let R1, R⋆

> 1i.i.d.

∼ ρ1P1 and R2 i.i.d.

∼ ρ2P2, where ρiPi is the pushforward of Pi under ρi. Consider the event drepr (R1, R⋆

> 1

) > drepr (R1, R2). For arbitrary ε > 0, this event occurs with probability 1 when 

drepr (R1, R2) > κ(A1, K1, Π1) + ε and drepr (R1, R3) < dinterp (A1, A2) − ε. Therefore, 

p ≥ 1 − P[drepr (R1, R⋆

> 1

) > κ(A1, K1, Π1) + ε] − P[drepr (R1, R2) < dinterp (A1, A2) − ε], (H.3) since ε > 0 was arbitrary, we yield the desired result. 

Corollary H.1. Let F1, F⋆

> 1i.i.d.

∼ P1, F2, F⋆

> 2i.i.d.

∼ P2. Let ˜C be the congruity between Π−11 (A1), Π−12 (A2).Define 

f (F1, F⋆ 

> 1

, F2, F⋆ 

> 2

) ≜ inf 

> ε>0

h

P[drepr (R1, R⋆

> 1

) > κ(A1, K1, Π1) + ε]+ 2P[drepr (R1, R2) < dinterp (A1, A2) − ε]) (H.4) 

+ ( P[drepr (R2, R⋆

> 2

) > κ(A2, K2, Π2) + ε]) 

i

.

Then, 

2 − f (F1, F⋆ 

> 1

, F2, F⋆ 

> 2

) ≤ ˜C ≤ f (F1, F⋆ 

> 1

, F2), (H.5) 

when f (F1, F⋆ 

> 1

, F2, F⋆ 

> 2

) ≥ 1.Proof. By Definition H.1, ˜C(p1, p2) ≜ 1 − | p1 + p2 − 1|. We break ˜C into two cases: 

˜C(p1, p2) = 

2 − (p1 + p2) if 1 ≤ p1 + p2 ≤ 2,

p1 + p2 if 0 ≤ p1 + p2 ≤ 1.

Since ˜C(p1 + p2) = ˜C(2 − p1 − p2), any lower (resp. upper) bound proved on one side transfers to a lower (resp. upper) bound on the reflected side. Thus, we separately bound each case. Consider first 

1 ≤ p1 + p2 ≤ 2. Then, 

˜C(p1, p2) = 2 − (p1 + p2),

31 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

≤ inf 

> ε>0

h

P[drepr (R1, R⋆

> 1

) > κ(A1, K1, Π1) + ε]+ 2P[drepr (R1, R2) < dinterp (A1, A2) − ε]) + ( P[drepr (R2, R⋆

> 2

) > κ(A2, K2, Π2) + ε]) 

i

,

where the last inequality follows from Equation (H.2). Now the case 0 ≤ p1 + p2 ≤ 1,

˜C(p1, p2) = p1 + p2,

≥ 2 − inf 

> ε>0

h

P[drepr (R1, R⋆

> 1

) > κ(A1, K1, Π1) + ε]+ 2P[drepr (R1, R2) < dinterp (A1, A2) − ε]) + ( P[drepr (R2, R⋆

> 2

) > κ(A2, K2, Π2) + ε]) 

i

.

H.2 Intervention-Implementation Duality 

Our results in the previous sections show that estimating both the representation similarity and interpretive compression is crucial to understanding interpretive equivalence. In general, enumerating the set of implementations for a given interpretation is hard. Herein, we make a connection between implementations and interventions. Specifically, we show that it is possible to view interventions as instantiations of new implementations. With this perspective, we bound the sample complexity (in interventions) of interpretive compression estimation. First, given a set of interventions, we define a notion of closure for alignment classes. 

Definition H.2. Let K ≜ (V,U, F, ≻) be some circuit and A be an η-faithful interpretation of K.Also, let Π be an alignment class that maps K’s variables onto A’s. Consider a set of interventions over all variables in V which we denote as I (V) (see Definition D.2). We say that Π is closed under 

I (V) if for each implementation K⋆ ∈ Π−1(A), there exists ˜f ∈ I (V) such that K⋆ = do (V ← ˜f ).

Remark. Any alignment class Π is closed under a natural set of interventions . Simply, given circuits 

K, K⋆ ∈ Π−1(A), this is the set of interventions that replace K’s transition functions, F, with all of 

K⋆’s transition functions, F⋆.

Remark. Dually, instead of explicitly enumerating an alignment class, we could instead specify a set of interventions under which K’s interpretation is preserved. This implicitly induces an alignment class. With this method, one only needs to argue that the interventions are interpretation-preserving. This is the method we use in GetImpl to construct implementation sets. 

Definition H.3. Let C be some set and d : C × C → R≥0 be some distance metric over C. Let 

{x1, . . . , xm} ⊂ C. Then, the empirical diameter of C is max 1≤i< j≤m d(xi, x j).

Proposition H.2. Let d : V × V → R≥0 be a distance metric between circuits. Let K be a circuit, A

be some η-interpretation of K ≜ (V,U, F, ≻), and Π be an alignment class. Let I (V) be a set of interventions on K under which Π is closed. Let P be a distribution over I . Let C = N(Π−1(A), d, ε/2)

be the covering number of the implementation space Π−1(A). Define 

pmin ≜ min   

> 1≤j≤C

P[{ι ∈ I (V) : do (V ← ι) ∈ B j}],

where {Bi} are balls of radius ε/2 that cover Π−1(A). Then, for 

m ≥ log (C) − ln (δ )

pmin 

,

we have that P[κ(A, K, Π) − ˆκm(A, K, Π) ≤ ε] > 1 − δ where ˆκ is the empirical diameter of Π−1(A)

computed from m sampled interventions. Proof. From Definition H.3, P[κ(A, K, Π) ≥ ˆκm(A, K, Π)] = 1. Consider the event κ(A, K, Π) −

ˆκ(A, K, Π) > ε. This occurs only if we draw m interventions {ι1, . . . , ιm} where there exists at least one ball Bi where there does not exist some ιi such that do (V ← ιi) ∈ Bi. This event occurs with probability at most (1 − pmin )m. By the Poisson approximation, we have that (1 − pmin )m ≤ e−mp min .Setting this less than δ and rearranging, we yield the result. 32